SPEAKER 0
this material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University in accordance with section 113 P of the Copyright Act 1968 The material in this communication maybe subject to copyright under the act any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice and the state is the

SPEAKER 1
creator and the regulator, right for those interactions, so you can see from that angle is, uh is much more complex in the way. But also I like to draw your attention to the first lecture when we have a big chart highlighting a kind of an evolution of the approach towards kind of, uh, you know, development and from getting the price right. Remember, getting the price right is referred to what? Getting the price right is referred to the market, right? Because the, you know, price is the, uh, the main mechanism for for resource allocation. So getting price right? Why, you know, the sentiment has to change right from getting price right to getting policy, right? Right For from getting the institutional right. So those evolution, you can also look at that. That particular angle you look at how we approach the market and, uh, versus, uh, the role of state, which I think is very useful because when we think about, uh, pure market allocation allocated efficiency as a market, it is. And, uh, we we miss out and a few kind of interactions, right? And, uh so that's, uh, one of the, uh the approach the course content. We can see that, uh, it touch upon the so many issues in a way. But I would like you to to be clear about the definition of the market and the definition, the role of the state, right? And about the pros and the cons and the market if we can rely on purely on market allocation of resources. And if you purely believe there's a welfare theorem right being introduced in the one which is a very important those marginal principle or some kind of a precondition, right in understanding if it if everything is perfect, we can rely on market to do the job, at least in theory. But we know in reality market are not perfect at all, right? I'll give you a few A few example. The dimension in looking at that one. So if that is the case, you know, we have to identify right? Some kind of a nature about, uh, about the market failure or the market imperfections. Right. So the the lecture gave a very, uh, right approach in looking at that one. And again, the following question is, what if a markets are imperfect and how and, uh, and by definition, right, So basically, you can use the, uh, the knowledge of the divergence between the private cost and the benefit and, uh, from, uh, the cost and the benefit of social cost. Those kind of divergences apply to goods and commodities, but also applies to the factor of production. Right. So therefore, you know, those are two things. When you put them together, you can see that the divergence of the of the price is, uh is a very important This is the basically, when you will see that how we can come up with some measures about the externality, the market externality. That's the way when you have a divergence existed, you can see that the market are not perfect. So that's one thing. Another thing is that when we are not perfect, there's a key. Several key features, right? Those key features are also very useful for you to analyse the real life life issue, including the issue at the moment for the, for example, the environmental degradation, the pollution and et cetera. So I think basically the three things right when markets are imperfect and, uh, we can see that, uh, we can see that, uh, there's a few things, right? Perhaps I can give you three examples. The first one is the is the asymmetrical information. So informations are asymmetrical and very difficult to get a per well, theory. Is there right for the perfect information. But when you have an asymmetrical information and then it compromised at the principle, right? It, uh, no. You know, the, uh so the, uh, this is, uh it so happened right when the, uh when the example is about the banks, the commercial banks are making loans, right? But the banks somehow are not so familiar or knowledgeable about, uh, the borrowers, their credentials right, their background and central. So therefore they can claim they are really good borrowers, but the bank don't know. So therefore, bank can give the the lending to the, uh, the the bad Borrowers because the banks commercial banks have to consider that, uh, you know, the returns and, you know, the profit and etcetera. So in that regard, you know, this is called the adverse selection. So the because of the SAF information, you know, not good. Uh, borrowers are being, uh, selected so adverse election can happen. So, of course, there's a many ways, uh, on part of the banks to actually imposing a certain, uh, you know, criteria, uh, to be able to to to, you know, scream right. Those are the borrowers. Now, you know, the the all the information the big data can be used for for the bank to, you know, to trace this, you know, the background of individuals. And, uh, so another example is about, uh, this is the adverse election. Another example is the moral hazard, right? Moral hazard. You can use one example and, uh, usually, you know, the, uh, I think that's also vividly reflected in the Asian financial crisis back to the 19 nineties. And, uh, during that crisis, you know all these a commercial bank, especially the middle and the smaller ones, You know, when they are operating well, But when the when the crisis hit and those banks are running a severe difficulties, you know, banks in, uh, Vietnam in Indonesia, in Thailand. Uh, even in Korea, you know, for those countries in a very difficult but somehow somehow the, uh those, uh, uh, commercial operators, right. They always think that in time of a crisis, So what they do. And instead of, you know, getting their domestic housing order, They always thinking that the government will bail them out and go actually did government China. Of course, it let up. Many go bankrupt. But the government also in, uh, put their hands and in helping them. So when the bailout happened, those banks will have saying that well, instead of, uh, you know, carrying out the, you know, reform, structural changes. And, uh so they do when the when the crisis is over, they just going back to the old way of doing business without really carrying out, You know, deep structural changes in the way. Why is that? Because we always think that if next crisis hit government will bail them out again. This is the, uh, the, uh the moral hazard. Uh uh uh. Issue, uh, occurred. But that can also happen in the insurance and other market as well. That's a good example about information issue, adverse selection and, uh, and moral hazard. So those things are also reflecting those kind of, uh, so market imperfection. So, in the way the role of a government being justified, right for rectifying So those are market imperfection or the market externality the government intervention is not in a in a negative way, right? In a way, but, uh, because they have to think about the 22 things, right, The first one If this, uh, negative externalities government worth pollution is a typical example, so government can in the position, you know, to to through regulation and through other means to rectify that one. But it is also the positive benefit which can overwhelmingly larger than the social benefit. That means the price are not reflecting. There are true contribution now, for example, education, right? So we are sitting in the classroom through education, perfect human capital. The real return in the future will be much higher than the price you pay, even though we know students paying higher prices for the education. But the real return, the social return of your education are much higher than the cost you pay now. So in that case, you know the subsidies of our government all being justified, right? Parents have their contribution. But government also spend a lot right building the infrastructure education facilities, but also held, you know, hire the teachers and, uh and so doing the job is all starting from, uh, media narrowing that gap narrow that gap between the social return and and the private returns in investment. So that's why you know, the, uh, investing education we mentioned in the last lecture about the importance of investing in women's education right determines so many other things. And that's a part of the discussion, uh, as a way of understanding those, uh, the externalities And, uh, what else in the in the lecture, I think in the lecture. By doing so, we can we can find that there's some kind of a principle there, right? The conditions for, you know, welfare improvement in a way. And, uh, the, uh, the market you know more reflecting the way of the competition, right? The competitiveness competition. And, uh, but the role of the state will be right. And, uh, in, uh, in meeting those kind of, uh, the public, uh uh, requirements. And, uh, did we mention about, uh, Roderick's saying, right market? It is not a self creating right market is not self stabilising, right? Market is not a self legitimising, and the market is not. The final one is what self creating, regulating and stabilising. And so that means the market is not automatically to deliver all these things right. That's basically highlighting the role of government, right? So But when government are doing that one, there is a There is a condition for doing that one. That means the improvement of output is not accompanied by the worsening of income distribution, right, or the improvement of income. Distribution is not accompanied by the loss of a of a production of output. So you can see there's a tricky relationship between these two, right? We know the market can do the job right in terms of resource allocation, but they are doing nothing in a perfect way. In fact, it's very imperfect way with all these ex and the central. So when government step in and it's especially out of a consideration of equity consideration, so what do you do? You may doing too much in terms of equalising income, and again that affects the incentive right for people to work. So in a sense, even though the equity concern, the objective can be achieved but at the cost of of efficiency. So the trade off between efficiency and equity can also be understood in discussing the role of a market versus the role of state. Is that clear? I think it is a very useful, very useful approach about towards understanding the role of a market versus the role of state in the way to understand the equity. Sorry. The trade off between equity and efficiency. Is that clear? We'll test you later on. OK, so this is the, uh this is the important point in in in understanding that one. So I think the second part of the lecture is the, uh is also I mean, you can look at that one. You know, there's a few, uh, dimension of that one, including the investment criteria for making investment in terms of, uh, in terms of, uh, the, uh Remember we mentioned of the market, you know, usually market won't consider, you know, the future that down the track in the long run, right? So this is all the job for government, right to put aside, you know, for considering not just the current generation but the intergenerational consideration of the income of of and And Of course, when you're doing through investment, then there's a certain criteria for making investment so government can play an important role in that one. So that's a rough summary about the cost. And I can't remember some of some of the details. But I think what I have just described roughly is about, uh, the the main things right. But understanding those things and again education, I mentioned about the positive externality but the pollution as an example for negative externality. Very useful example to see how the divergence, uh, between the social and the private cost and the benefit. So when you have this example in mind, you can easily understand that one and, uh, but also, let me emphasise again that, uh, approach to the issue of a market versus a role of state you can using the, uh, the the knowledge we have learned through institution discussion, we can also using, uh, that one. You know, the first big chart about the getting price right to getting policy and institution, right? Why they need that Changes in the context development. So that's our concern. We're not just talking about a relationship between market and the state per SE, and we are actually framing those issues in the context of development. Right, So you can come up with the many examples, right? We can also talk about, uh, you know, in in some case, in the development of context, it's not just, uh whether market is, uh, a perfect or not. In fact, in many countries, many cases is the market is a very much imperfect and in many cases, the market is actually amazing, Uh, entirely in a way. So for the job of a development, that means the, uh, you know, I have to, through the very basic things right to create a market system. And, uh, because, uh, so far at least of 200 years now, we don't have a better alternative. We we just don't and the market is imperfect are imperfect. But they are the way, the fundamental way in, uh, running the modern economy. And because the there are the very fundamental key functions about, uh, resource allocation And, uh, because resources are scarce, right? So allocation of, uh, of resources and play a key role in, uh, in understanding the economic development as well. So that's a summary. So, any questions, I think it is very useful, because after institution discussion, institution the the fact of of of, uh, development and the institution. And then we have this one You can, uh you can look at the the relationship, right. And the connection between the this course content in the past few weeks and with that one and, uh, very important, uh, lecture. All right. So if, uh, no question, Let me, uh, just linking that one to the, uh, to the similar discussion today, we are talking about, uh, productivity. When we're thinking that the productivity immediately, you can see what sort of a framework we can use right in applying this, uh uh, approaching this kind of productivity issue we already discussed right in the previous lecture on growth is the gross accounting, right? When When We have a gross accounting in the framework in our mind Immediately within when the productivity is The law is actually related to TFP. Right is a total factor productivity. So the framework already you already know that one. OK, you already know the, uh, in a fundamental way. And when we have a discussion last time, you will know how we approach the productivity of TFP issue. Why some countries, uh uh, TFP are relatively high and some are very low And why, you know, overall, the productivity level become some kind of a STN. In a way, it's not a very powerful impetus for economic growth exerted in the growth process. So So I like to use this a seminar and, uh, to specifically talking about, uh, uh, some kind of a phenomenon, that phenomenon reflecting very slow growth of productivity level in the past couple of decades. And, uh, and we know the TFP. The productivity enhancement is, uh, is so important, right? Remember, we mentioned about the two sources of, uh, of a real income. The welfare improvement one is the productivity. The other is remember, we'll talk about that concept uh, later on. Another one is Let me tell you, you won't forget. Next time is the terms of trade, right? Is the terms of trade. Improvement can be a real source of a country's income. Countries like Australia, right, continue to improve the terms of trade. Why is that? Because the demand for countries export minerals resources are very strong, pushing up the export prices of their export right, mineral etcetera. So that is the definition that is the export prices over import prices. So therefore, you can see countries are continuously improve their terms of trade. That's a real benefit. That's a real benefit for the country. And, uh, of course we know in the development of context, we know the terms of trade against the the primary goods is actually is not not good, right? It's actually deteriorating, uh, over the past 100 years by 0.55 in, uh uh, every year. So it is not conducive for those, uh, development. But anyway, back to the productivity. So that's a phenomenon. Using the knowledge we have learned, we always think about how to improve. Right. Remember last time we were talking about how to improve productivity the TFP and identify sources of slow growth in TFP. Importantly, at the beginning. And then you can see what sort of measures can be taken to be able to for the country to to push or to constantly improve the TFP. And, uh so we have, uh, examples of, uh of doing that one now falling productivity. So productivity is it's a it's an engine of productivity is the engine for prosperity, as we mentioned right in terms of trade and productivity. So, uh, because the factor of production, basically, when you make a contribution to growth, you got a return, right? So therefore the the factor con contribution, you got a return. So any extra in way of, uh, to bring the benefit and, uh, of course relate to the prosperity is the productivity improvement, as I mentioned earlier on. But the level of productivity has been falling rather consistently across the different countries, you know, in the past putting a break on living standard in the developed world and slowing the rate of improvement in the emerging economies and other developing economies. So rather strange in a way, why that happened is not a sudden suddenly it happened. But there's some kind of a falling consistently at the productivity level. And as the economist, perhaps you need to ask that question why that happened, right? So IMF researchers estimate that the total factor productivity is increasing in advanced economies at no more than 0.2% a year, which is, uh, this is actually very low. And for some country, you know, it may be around one, but previously it's above 2% per annual, the improvement of productivity. And now you know it's a 0.2%. That's a very low level of improvement. OECD area productivity growth was already on the slide before the global financial crisis in a hit in 2008. So even before that, one is already start coming down and has been sharply lower ever since. So after the GFC, that, uh, improvement of productivity actually falling even more so then you know the, uh, it shows that it does not appear to be a passing phenomenon, and the slow down of productivity growth has clearly been a global phenomenon. So that's why, after we have discussed those growth, accounting and understanding, what constitutes the, uh the elements of enhancing TFP. Now we come back to the reality and the reality is that the global there's a kind of a global slowing down of the productivity level across the board. That means it's not just for the specific country of rich or or emerging or developing all of them. The productivity level is coming down. We know productivity is the engine of prosperity. So without really down the track, you know have a way of finding ways of enhancing productivity. Who will be in trouble, Right? So how come we can sustain the living of standard? How come we can have an income, the welfare to improve people's welfare? How come we can, you know, have a means of dealing with all these? Uh, the common issues, right. The challenges like a po poverty and reduction and, uh, and the food issue that all of them will be very much related, you know, behind the productivity we also know from the previous lecture, you know, the improvement of productivity is also so important for developing country. We started from agricultural sector, right, but also and seeing that you know, the decreasing return, perhaps also increasing return in industry. But by all means, you know, the productivity enhancement, uh, become a very important. So this is the background. This is the fact that, uh, we we do need to, you know, to think right to look at why that happened. So in today, this is a seminar. Let's focus on to give us some explanation of that one. This is the for the developed country, right? From the 19 seventies, for example. You can see this is the basically the, uh, G G7 productivity growth. And you can see the trend is actually continue to decline right over time. It's not the latest one, but latest one also reflecting, you know, very low productivity level. And, uh, back from, uh, you know, about 5% for some country, For example, In Japan, Japan is a typical case. You know, that's a that's a dark line, right? The black one. You can see that, Uh, from 5% to right now, it's almost like, uh, you know, close to zero and, uh, many other countries is the same thing. And I think Italy is a very rather rather bad one. Where is the United States? The united is uh is a blue one, right? And rather stable over time, but again in recent time is actually on the decline as well. So that's for the rich country. Let's see the evidence of a of a falling productivity Advanced country already show some emerging in the middle. One is the emerging market, and the low income country is the green. You can see this, uh, again, very obvious, right? It's actually sharp fall in terms of productivity. And, uh, I compare with the previous, uh, you know, uh, uh, period of development. Which, of course, you know, say that the productivity is improving all the time. And, uh, making making a lot of things are easier, as you can see, because the productivity income and the revenues and all other things. And, uh, but when the productivity is falling, you know, a lot of problem can emerge from that one. OK, so that's the fact. And in my in our mind, this is the TFP right. We already have exercises about, uh, understanding the TFP. Right. And, uh, what constitutes that one and how we can make changes and to in order to enhance the TAP. So keep that question in mind when we going through this, Uh, this thing Now, this is the basically we can talk about, uh, the consequences of growth and the possibility this is our stock again. The IMF researcher said in the this is a quite, uh, important report by, uh, 2017, the gun with the head wind. The title of that report is the global productivity report. So on that one is the very good summary about actually what's going on. And, uh, and then the projection for the future, perhaps also some policy and, uh, prescriptions right about how the productivity can be. And the report says that almost half the drop in advanced countries output since the global financial crisis is down to the deceleration in TFP. So for rich country, since the GFC, you know half of the output, the drop is due to the deceleration of the tap that's quite substantial. 50% of the falling of output after the global financial crisis is due to deceleration of tap in the emerging market economy and low income countries. Slower TFP growth represented than an even greater share of output losses. That means more than 50% is due to the falling of TFP we already show in the previous page the charts right to show the the evidence about the falling the productivity level in developing countries emerging as well as advanced country. But the actually cause for the falling of the output is very poor. Country is very much due to the the falling of a TFP. Well, so that is something, you know, it concerns us, right? So finding a way of improving or rectifying you know, those things and, uh, to change the trend is very important. So tackling the global productivity puzzle is among the most pressing public policy issues today. You talk about many other things, right? We talk about the many other challenges. But dealing with the productivity is the most pressing public policy, the challenges finding the way. Now you are in a position because we have learned right, So gross accounting. And you also know from the from the textbook those charts reflecting those TFP differences. But that is in the normal years, you know, they are already differences, right? But now, with the crisis hit one after another, right global financial crisis. Now the covid crisis You can see that the impact on the productivity even more severe in a way. And, uh, due to many reasons. And, uh, so in that case, how the public policy, in a way, you know, come back with the policy designed to rectifying those things and especially finding a way of enhancing the productivity. You know, that is the very pricing issue. It's not something we can ignore, right and just let it go. No, it's actually very pricing issue for doing that one now before we do, and we can just come up with some kind of a suggestion. Sorry to say explanation about why productivity is falling. The slowdown in TFP is especially Ping. Why? Because it has coincided with a period of unrelenting innovation that has included in the rise of a smartphones. You know, the appearance of a cloud computing the Internet of things, the development of 3D printing, improve the robotics and the sensors advancing gene uh, technology and the material sciences. Increasingly sophisticated artificial intelligence A I and so sophisticated global lo logistic and the production system. So with all this happening against the background of falling productivity, so it's a puzzle, it's a perplexing right, you know, because with anticipation, with all the technology we just mentioned, we will expect there is some kind of a productivity enhancing effect as a result of that one, right? But why it didn't happen? I'll give you the explanation shortly. Why did it happen? In a way? So one contention is that the productivity is in fact the growing, but not showing up in the statistic or waiting for the tech to kick in. So that's one rather optimistic theory saying that you know, not yet. It's happening even though, for some tech technology already happened in a couple of decades or even three decades now. But they still waiting for some kind of, uh, the impact to kick in. And, uh, but however, for some rather on the pessimistic side saying that no, those things are won't affect. So this is the, uh, the so called secular stagnation. In a way, Robert Gordon is the person, uh uh uh economist in the United States, and he's a leading figure on that one. They argue that the world has entered a period of a secular stagnation, meaning that you know, you won't That's the time for high growth that the time is over, you know, even for countries like China, you know, on average, in the past 40 years, so the average growth rate is something like 8 to 9% over a certain period is above 9%. But overall, you know, it is a a 9%. And, uh, so people will expect, you know, that growth will continue, right? But it's not. You can see the recent years that the growth is actually slowing down in China, but also affecting the rest of the world in a way. But whether we actually enter the world of a secular stagnation is a debatable is debatable. And economies have a very different view. Some believe that probably yes, very likely, especially after those, uh, crisis. But some will be be, uh, you know, being rather optimistic, thinking that we still have the potential to have a high growth. And, uh, and after after lectures on the on growth, you will be able to actually make an assessment about the growth potential, right? And, uh, for certain countries, you can see that, uh, the the potential growth rate, right, versus the, uh, times of warranty growth rate and the natural growth rate. And, uh, which is the, you know, the hero DOMA model anyway, so let's come back to that one. So the current wave of innovation do not jolt productivity in a way that the previous wave did. This is now. We we call this the fourth Industrial Revolution, right? Or industrial, you know, 4.0. So this is a new version and resulting from those innovation in the previous three industrial revolution, each of the industrial Revolution led to a substantial improvement in productivity, out the world income revenue and the welfare each of them, but not the first one. Why not the current one and the current one? Perhaps even more significant, I think, in terms of the the real impact. In a way, perhaps the artificial intelligence, The fourth Industrial Revolution will be overwhelming. You know there's a bigger impact than the previous, uh, industrial revolution, but not happen in in the way on the impact on the productivity. So it's a puzzle, right? Anyway, its stagnation. You can think about that one OK, yourself to think about because it's a very it's not a small issue. That issue is the, uh, is a determined so many other issues the prospect of global economy down the track. Also a lot of reform, like a multinational regional groupings and such as are all very much related to what, to the growth dynamism down the track, either in the regional context or global context. So, therefore, the the more promising growth the forecast in a way will lead to a more positive development down the track. But if it is a very negative in a way, continuously, we can see that affects the way that, uh, for example, regional Cooper operation and un holding in a way and, uh, with the global the push for the new wave of globalisation that can also be affected. So now what are the explanation? So there's a several explanation. The first one is that the productivity improvement do not result from information technology alone. Real productivity gains requires a substantial changes in business processes. That means the technology are being available made available now. But if I have a very slow structural adjustment, I'm part of a firm, for example, on part of a government in way of investing. And, uh, it won't affect because the governor's issue, for example, the structural issue incentive issue right over there and the business environment. So if those things are not in the fundamentally changed a fundamental way being changed, you know you won't probably absorb those technology and reflecting the real impact on the technology and and the productivity. The second one is that the gap between the best performers and the rest is widening some good companies and fully utilise the technology available now to enhancing their productivity. So they are doing very well, suggesting that the productivity gains are not being disseminated as effectively as it used to be. Previously the technology spreading fairly quickly across the board. So all you know, being, uh but now we can see that some companies, especially the big tech company, they are doing extremely well and fully utilising the technology. The other way is the company you know, more and more every day, you know, releasing those kind of a new, uh uh, invention and innovation, the product extraordinary. You can see, of course, their profit productivity will be enhancing, uh, enhanced very much. But the dissemination is an issue. That means, uh, the rest of the economy. Other parts of the, you know, economy are not picking up. The pace are those are big firms in a way. So the gap is widening in a way, and perhaps also due to the nature of the the new market, you know, like, uh, you know, Internet things. So anyway, so this can be another explanation. The third one is that the lagging companies, those are the company are not, you know, taking a full advantage of those technology. Those those companies lack the capacity to adopt the productivity enhancing technology technology available or potentially there, Right. But, uh, they have some call. They hamper their ability to do so and the practise of competitors at the at the frontier So they are liking for for for for doing that one, like an ability to put it in another way. Such technology and the practise are less transferable than it used to be. So those technology may not, you know, you can buy the chips right from those big players, right? But for the innovation next step, you know you need a lot of more, so may not be able to easily to be, you know, be learned by the later commerce in doing so. So perhaps the second point, and if that is the case, the gap probably will be widening. So therefore, when you every job that you know, the more advanced one, even though they are doing very well. But, uh, you every job you don't see a very obvious evidence to show the average productivity improvement. So that's a third explanation. Now the another explanation, which again this is also powerful explanation is the so called the existence of a zombie firms. So the rise of a so called zombie firm may be contributing to the productivity problem. OECD researchers argue that the zombie firm those that would go under without government assistance or support they drag on productivity in two ways. Number one, they are typically less productive themselves, the zombie firm, so must be less productive themselves and make it harder for new and more innovative and productive entries. You know, the new players, uh, to get a foothold in the market. So they they somehow, you know, uh, holding the, uh, the assay, right? All the, uh, the, uh all the the Capitals and, uh, so affecting the overall. And, uh, so, given that investment is the primary means by which technology and the management of how is transferred. The misallocation of capital This is the second point caused by the zombie firms is exacerbated by the easy financial condition that have prevailed since the 2008 global financial crisis, and all serve to deepen the problem. Now, we are not just having the easy financing make it easier because of the the fighting, the crisis. Right? But now we have this, uh uh co VD crisis. The same thing happened again because the government have a massive support to the firms. Doesn't matter. You are productive or unproductive. You are efficient or inefficient, it all being supported government. So in a normal market competition, those are inefficient, unproductive firm will be competed out from the market. So therefore resources will be redirected towards the most effective firm. This is what we call one I live. This is what we call the creative destruction. All right, the phenomenon due to the you know, this is due to creative destruction. But creative disruption didn't happen in time of crisis or in the aftermath of the crisis because, you know, it doesn't matter. You know what sort of a firm. You're all being supported and, uh, now have a PhD. Students. And, uh, he's, uh, just submitted his thesis now under examination specifically on zombie firms, including, uh, including the Australian case and his work in the, uh, the, uh, New South Wales Treasury. The, uh, the So that's the problem. That means they are easy financing, become a financing condition. Easy financial condition can be a part of the reason causing those kind of a problem. And they supposed to be good because the government response to crisis right, in order to maintain the employment, the standard of living and, uh and, uh, and the stability, the social stability. So government is just a help, right As a, you know, massive, massive, uh, you know, health and including Australia as we know job seekers and all this kind of a scheme. And, uh and so. But somehow we have to confront those challenges, you know, especially in the post or the aftermath of the crisis. That means that you have to face that reality. Those revenues those, uh, support is being, uh, translated into, uh, the heavy rising debt level on part of a government that needs to be tackled, right? But on the other hand, on the macro level, the firm level you do need a strategy in carrying out the structural reform in a way to make it easier. Not in a final, you know, in a dramatic way. But the creative destruction is so important is related to today's lecture role of a market role of a state and equity and efficiency. And, uh, it's so important in terms of, uh, resource allocation. I already mentioned that resource have to be directed or redirected towards the most productive firm. If you don't do that one. Sorry. You know, we become a Stig because so much resources are being trapped being trapped in the low efficiency firms. And, uh, how come you can expect, you know, those the most productive and the young, productive, uh, firms to be, you know, uh, developing the innovative way because they are lack of capital, lack of resources for for doing so. So that's the reality, I think, also a big challenge in the post panem world. Perhaps the next few years, those kind of adjustment will be there and, uh, without adjustment. We Sorry will be rather Stig in a way, you know, those are argument about the secular Stig nation Probably will be right because we didn't get a policy right in a way or in time of crisis was very necessary. But in a post pandemic post crisis, you know, those kind of a structural reform policy readjustment has to be there all right to make the innovation happening. So that's the existence of a zombie firm as another reason now, another one is about the role of intangible capital. So digital innovation are intensive intangible capital, right. Previous industrial revolution, right, is all tangible things, right, Good resources. Those are energies and central. But this one is a very digital innovation, are very intensive in intangible capital and allow the products and information to be reproduced at a marginal cost which is close to zero. Right when you have a you know, the, uh the spread of using the computer software some have to pay, but a lot of products. Actually, the marginal cost is very, very low. So they therefore make it easy easier for such a producer to take over most of the market. And this result in a two speed economy with a widening gap between firms with a high productivity and investment in intangible capital and the firms with a low productivity and a little investment in intangible capital. So the gap we mentioned already previous page right? There's a gap there for most of most advanced, you know, firm and with the with the followers. But now when you come to the intangible capital, you can see the gap perhaps even widening some. Some firms are doing so well in a way making investment in terms of intangible capital, and we, of course, enhancing their productivity. But the people the firms are left behind with low productivity and they have a little investment in intangible capital. So this is by definition we can call this the digital divide. The digital divide is resulting from the you know, the nature of the intangible, the digital innovation which is related to the intent, the role of intangible capital that play such an important role in determining the not just the production but also trade. Now the trading activity is happening in a massive way. It's not just a trading goods right is actually treating the services. The service is, uh, is trading and the service is very much related to the intangible capital. Those information, logistic and containers, you can see it still shaping right around the globe. But, uh, a lot of things you can't see is through Internet, right? And the trading, the services through Internet And, uh, the, uh, one example is, uh, Professor, uh, winter Wu from UC Davis. He retired now, but he used to his regular participation participator to the, uh, China update. We organised one thing. He mentioned that in the United States in the San Diego. He, uh when he do the tax return, for example, he's got the materials organised he sent through before bed to to India, and the companies in India will process that one. He just went back when he wake up in the morning. All tax return file is made available to him. Brilliant and with a very cheap price. You know, those are just one example of all those service trade across border right again, the internet of the of the thing. And, uh, it's a it's a tremendous It's not just just one example but many other area now involving the digital trade And, uh, that's other intangible capital. So therefore, if you don't have a way of, uh, finding a way of investing used to be the machinery, you know, equipment and the central. But now it's more and more. It's about the software things, right? It's about the human capital managing those software. And, uh, we Yeah, we mentioned about, uh, I think last time we mentioned about what sort of education we need right in the in the 21st century, it is very much related. And to this point, so again, the digital divide and digital divide again even more, you know, plays out in the country, rich or poor country. So in developing country that even more so now finding the way of enhancing. Oh, there's a There's other things right. Slow down in the rate of productivity in China is one of the also the closest second largest economy most dynamic in the past. But now it's coming down. You know, the productivity level is very low now, and it used to be one third. The contribution to growth is due to, uh, productivity enhancement, 30% and for for a couple of decades, 19 eighties and the 19 nineties. And, of course, a lot of due to the supply side reform, incentive and etcetera and the slow down in a race of schooling in emerging economy, there's evidence to show those kind of, uh, uh, slowing down that, of course, weaken the the, uh, the, uh the base for the human capital. Therefore, again, you know, right person, uh uh to to do those kind of a job a reduced appetite for difficult structural reform not reduced appetite for difficult structural reform. Because the structural reform very hard, right, politically, socially and economically. So therefore the politician sometimes, you know, especially subject to, you know, Democratic re-election election and re-election. So they're very concerned about the short term, short term objective rather than the long term objective. Structural reform is very hard. It requires a very hard decision. People may not happy with those kind of reform. So therefore, and, uh, uh, politicians are hesitating right in carrying out those big reform. And, uh, this is the swing activity towards low productivity service industry are all weighing on the emerging economy productivity. So that's another reason for doing that one. Now, with all this analysis, let's uh, finding a way to boost the productivity. And the previous This is the one, you know, the, uh, identify those one right IMF assertion. It is again gone with the headway report that advancing structural reform and nurturing open trade and the migration policies have a deliver delivered a sizable TFP gains in the past is also likely to meet its own political headway. This is the again if you use the current example in Australia, right by. You know, by now we have more than a half million people migrated to Australia, and most of them are students again highly, you know, trained. And, uh, this is the and, uh, the study shows this is actually very much enhanced technology productivity enhancing, uh, policy. And even though the next few years, probably the number will be down. But somehow the Australia rely on so much on this, uh, the migration and the IMF report shows that in the migration, open trade reform are the key measures for enhancing those, uh, productivity. Uh, we already mentioned that reform is a very difficult in a way. And, uh, nursing open trade is also difficult right now because of the globalisation even though there are some regional grouping doing all the things but globally, you know, globally the globalisation in retreat as we know it. Right? So, uh, so it's a difficult and, uh, so migration, perhaps a relatively easy for some country, but not for others in a way. But they're causing the lot of problem, right? The social and, uh, in Australia right now is the housing, right, because the housing approval is very, very, very slow when you have this a half million people coming into the country. So where do you stay? You know, those kind of a debate is going on and perhaps also the social welfare. And, uh, and other things, uh, can be also, uh uh, on agen agenda for for for for debate. Anyway, So government can make a big difference through policy priorities and investment that improve education and population health. Right? Health is, uh, uh I mean, after this kind of a global pandemic crisis, and that's become a really important issue, right? The welfare, the health condition of the, you know, workforce and ordinary people become so important and also streamline the regulation and the lower business cost. We mentioned about that one right? It's such a challenges and the business condition for that one. So there is a need for a clear agenda of a public policy to stimulate the productivity gain. That means the public policy now is actually is so much in demand that policy is not just a policy per SE. For example, spending now that policy also have to be rather comprehensive in a way because including the reform agenda, the structural reform agenda that's become so necessary, including the regulation which actually facilitate right to improve the business environment, the business conditions right in which capital flows, F, DS and or trade technology transfer can all happen. But without those kind of a policy agendas, you know how you can say wow, you know, spending government spending can help but can help but may not be helpful for the enhancement of productivity. So therefore those kind of agenda has to be clearly addressed, you know, to aiming to improve the improvement of productivity. So, uh, for those students who are from public policy right department, you know, even even more so in thinking about how to design those policy in the post pandemic, perhaps We are not kind of, uh, back to the old days in a way or doing the things as routine that we do before. No. So this kind of really need need a new thinking new way of thinking in a in a post pandemic world. And to be able to really come come back to the, uh, the our key concern that to improve the productivity. All right, so now there's another thing that has overcome the digital divide between the rich and the poor country and between the different section of the society within a country by lowering the cost of a digital technology and making such a technologies more transferable, so more transferable, That means remember, we mentioned about a phenomenon, right? A leading company doing things but the rest of the economy doing other things. So the followers have some kind of a bar in a way, but can be through public policy, other policy to make it easier for those technology to be transferred to the later com. So therefore you can see, uh, the average improvement of average productivity across the different section of the society, not just the leading company of a few United States. The, uh, the Department of Justice recently? Uh, not Su. But actually, uh, you know, uh, give a penalties for apple apple? Uh, companies were substantial thing That is actually monopolised those kind of a market apple. Everyone use apple, right iPhone and other products and et cetera, but it seems to be doing so well. But why the Department of Justice actually using that example right to tackle those of monopoly monopoly supposition. Right? So people think that by doing so, you can step in those kind of, uh, innovation in a way. But again, for the sake of a market competition, you know, the US is not doing that one. Perhaps In fact, the European Union already done. So, you know, in the past few years again, this is the kind of example. You know, you can see how you know this policy, uh, being, uh, uh, being implemented in dealing with those kind of issues. No embracing the new tech, Uh uh, the opportunity. This is actually taken from Australia, and, uh, last year about a year ago. About once in a generation. There is another inflexion point in technology that the changes in the way that we are doing. We do everything almost like everything. Now it only becomes obvious years in retrospect, just how profound the change really was. And by that time, organisations and the nations that saw the opportunity and acted most quickly have leaped ahead of the pack that mean for those countries or organisation, they know it, they know what at a stake. So they take action more quickly and doing things well, you can see that they are ahead of others in doing so. This is the message, you know, because the technology is changing the way we do everything. So therefore we cannot say wow, you know, let them do the technology. We can do the old way of, uh, in in the old way. No, precisely that applies to everything. That means that there's no escape. Everyone, every firm have to make adjustment. That's the message. Every single individual like us, we have to make an adjustment make it is a more adaptive to such a, uh, technological, uh, environment. So I think that's quite profound message, uh, from this, uh, uh, articles. Now the world is in such, uh, infection. But this is already right. and all the way of, uh, dep. So right now, as all the ways of deploying and using technology are swept away, it is still there. But you know, we have to follow the new trend. We used to all manage and operate technology ourselves. Today we are consumers of technology. See the change we we we benefit. We are consumers of technology. Simple as it is sound, it is a powering massive changes. OK, let me, uh, repeat again, a country firm government individual is the same thing. So efficiency driven through the economy, our mind are below E. And when I look at the, uh what happened to a I, you know, check G BT only one of them. Now there is an emerging the same artificial intelligence combined with the big data and that technology, perhaps down the track will be connecting to all the normal firms. Normal and manufacturing firm will be utilising those kind of technology. No escape. You have to do it and drive this car, for example, right? Not mentioned about those payment things. It's all happening now. It it's a mind blowing, and we cannot just pretend No, no. Let's just, uh for developing country even more so, that's the point. Uh, we mentioned about, uh, the developing country. That means the same thing. They should catch up that one. To narrow the gap of the digital divide and, uh, to be able to in a good position to to catching up and in a way to, uh, finding a way of, uh if we believe that's the perhaps the the real source of productivity improvement down the track. That means that's the only way. There's no other alternative and, uh, to enhance the productivity. Which again, let me emphasise, is the one of the key uh uh, objective for the, uh, economic growth and the development. I don't list specifically the question for this, uh, se seminar, but it's a very obvious the question we discuss now, the second hour, we have a smaller number, so but I can join to me. I can join one group. I can join one group. So we have, uh, some kind of a discussion. And then, uh, why the technology is falling. What are the causes for doing that one. Do we have a better way in the in the considering of the new technology of, uh, catching up or or in the way of, uh, you know, enhancing the productivity. And finally, is that how the developing country can do right in this kind of endeavours in a way, And, uh, not somehow being left behind further because you can see, uh, twice in this similar discussion identified the gap there the most advanced and the and the followers. So that's a That's today's seminar. And, uh, we're going to have a two week, uh, teaching break. That will be a very good time for you to think about, apart from enjoying the Canberra autumn just beautiful from now on, and the till we till the end of April for me, I think if you really enjoy the the real the colour of the leaves, the autumn leaves, that's actually the first week of May, even though a lot of leave early falling. But, uh, early early May also very beautiful. So enjoy the autumn and, uh, in Canberra. But again, you know, use some time to think about your writing, because when we assumed, uh, after two weeks again, there's another six weeks of lecture, so we will be quite demanding of your time. So, uh, again during the, uh, the teaching break, that's good opportunity. And, uh, so we don't have a break. And, uh, but let's just affirm the group. And now for those discussion and towards the end, I'm going to use about 10 to 15 minutes talking about writing, writing your essay. All right? Now, any questions and how long? Uh, we have about 10 students online. So any questions from you and you will organise the group, right? So you can just follow the question I just online and, uh, for some group discussion, and then we have again give you the priority, Uh, for presentation after discussion. All right. OK, so we can suspend the recording now. Yeah. All right. So, high honour, I will.

SPEAKER 2
I will send you to the breakout room. See you. Maybe in 10 to 15 minutes again.

SPEAKER 3
Hey, I hope we join in this discussion.

SPEAKER 2
The room is open. Please join the breakout room 10. And for the reminding online students, please join the breakout room for discussion.

SPEAKER 3
Right? Why is that? But I like that. OK, since for deal with Are you Oh, so there is a here. Ok, No, What? That Um, and another one. Ok, Ok, listen right. It's just I don't know Exciting. OK, low scale, OK? Yeah. Transmitted smaller gene liver smaller as yeah to be new. Subtract excuse Now OK section I guess I Jersey population it sounds like how can you? Right? Ok, it's fine. And OK, what previous subject Consumption better We all things of not doing ok, OK, The source something like that formed their thank you That is But I think that he How so? This is a problem. No OK requirements any anybody each other and select the right to It's gonna be that my chance? Yeah. Yes commenting I stri have to be so they are on this count. How much? Ok, there is a plan and you give me a cigar person say she's Yes, yes based So but And also the countries Yeah, and something. Ok, they your saying se three of Ok, so thanks so much more access the young? Yes. Before it was like there's industrial Yes OK of who are secure Want to problem? Ok, foundational. Yeah, he was a mhm. Yeah, And your daughter Thank you. Innovating more. We just got you or this consumer, OK? No. OK, right? Yes. Those yeah. Where you guys in the world? Maybe government. She involved Caribbean. OK, you know all my ok and good paper, but in the yeah, in my mind, Because I will call you back, Correct?

SPEAKER 1
Yes. Thank you pretty soon to No, it's just close or break. OK, I see. Ok, thank you. Let's start. Yeah. Alright. So, uh, thank you for doing that. And, uh, I like to, uh, perhaps invite our online group, uh, to have a presentation. Uh, first then, uh, jointly by the you know in-person group shortly. Yes, please. Yeah. All right.

SPEAKER 4
Thank you. Thank you. Hello, everyone. Um, our group didn't get all the four questions that you had, uh, shared earlier, Professor. So, um, we only discussed two questions that we, um, remembered, um And so we were reflecting first on the on the courses and decline of, uh, TFP, uh, in terms of it's, uh, coinciding with the technology in innovation. And, um referring to what? What you were saying? Um, it, uh, appears to our understanding from that sharing that not every new technology innovation can be conducive to TFP. Um, so much of our discussion, um, lingered on the how, uh, can developing countries adapt or lacking country? Uh, try and bridge this, uh, digital divide. And so, uh, some of our sharing, um, we were looking at Yes, um, of course. You know, the the technology, um, should be lesser in cost to accommodate that bridging and making it more transfer transferable. But we were thinking, What does that look like? Um, and so for a developing country, that would mean they would have to consider investing in infrastructural, uh, development for technology to accommodate, Um um, transferable, you know, receiving of such a new innovation. They would also have to invest on education and training and to have more digital literacy. Um, there was another comment about, uh, investing also making, um, uh, changes to policy and regulations that promotes, uh, affordable access to technology and safeguard um, against, um, monopolising practises. Uh, that makes it difficult for the, um, developing countries or the lagging country to to catch up. Um, and in those discussion, we there were some questions that arise from us. Is it OK if we can just share those questions and and leave it there? Um um, maybe you could respond to it after, um, the presentations from other group, but, um, So while we were sharing, we were trying to better understand, uh, the concept of zombie films. Um, you know, So we would like to understand more about the zombie firms Look, like from that, um, seminar. And also, what are examples of intangible capital? Um, as well, um, in terms of this of, um, of this discussion on, uh, digital, uh, innovation. What does it look like? So, apologies. There the two questions we were able to, uh, discuss and two further questions from us to to to thank you.

SPEAKER 1
Thank you very much. Uh, Tahiri, uh, that's a wonderful, uh, presentation. I think the point you make is about, uh, investment in infrastructure, which is basically the new infrastructure is a very, very important one. And, uh, digital related, For example, the second point you mentioned about education, you know, increasing the digital literacy. This is, uh, uh, a remarkably important. And, uh, because when people are recognise the importance through education, the action can be taken. Right? So this kind of thing and, uh, the, uh, the, uh So I think it is, uh, the the point you mentioned about, uh, a question. The second, uh, question is about the intangibles, which is actually very much related to to what you have suggested on this two point every specific policy can be related to because the focus will be different now. So therefore, intangible capital is the, uh, different from the tangibles. Tangible continue to play important role, especially, uh, for the later commerce. And, uh, but, uh, the again the country should push for the more in terms of the, uh, the you know, the emphasising, the importance of intangible capital. There's a couple of papers. Uh, no. In fact, there's more papers now on the intangible capital. And, uh, the, uh I think importantly, perhaps to to read through those, uh, those, uh uh, uh, paper articles and, uh, to reflect, uh, why and how that important? I think from now on, as I mentioned that, uh, determining of, uh, not just the production, but also trade. And, uh, it's very much related to those capital. But anyway, so that's a very good, uh uh, pre presentation and, uh, relevant point and and a good question. Thank you. Any any others, Uh, from, uh, the online group I want to present. All right, so perhaps let's move back to our room and, uh, maybe starting from your group here, and, uh, I'll give you the microphone.

SPEAKER 5
I don't think I can do justice to the rich conversation that we had just had. So, like the things that I remembered. OK, so, um, like we were thinking, What, um what does developing economies can do in order to catch up with in terms of like, boosting TFP productivity? So, um, one there there were like, three clusters like one is like increasing regional Cooper operation, which is what we felt like If you're a small economy with a small, um, domestic market, there's really not much there that can you know, there's just so much, um that your your economy can produce much more if you can, like, have access to other markets. Right. So there's there's, like, greedy rule for increased regional Cooper operation. But then we situated that in the current context, where you know, if I'm an exporter and you're asking me to, like, diversify my my products, um, I would need to have a certainty that there are markets open for my goods, right? But the way how things are right now, if there's just way too much like the the rise of the global, the globalisation due to rising populist and C for markets and economies to, like do things self sufficiency, you know, and, um, the geopolitical tensions and things like that, it's gonna be hard for Exporters like to even think about diversifying their their products if the market is not gonna be there. If I do develop my products. So there's a lot of, like, wait and see at the moment in terms in terms of that. So but then we also thought about, um, education. Uh, there's really a role, significant role for the government in that in that policy space and particularly one colleague here from her country, kind of like she explained, um, the the the context of her of her country. She's felt like, um, the the population is not investing much in in education because there's lack of information there as symmetrical information. So like we're trying to connect as well, like the the the lesson materials with the TFP. And there's an issue here between EFP and then asymmetrical information in education because, um, the population is not willing to invest in education because they do not know that if they do, um, they will be able to be employed in this kind of industries. So there's a There's huge unemployment rise, uh, increasing in unemployment or large unemployment in certain industries where critical skills are needed, but not but the population that's not informed. So in this sense, um, we felt like, uh, more incr. Um, the government can provide increased labour market information system there to, like, increase transparency and, um, share information to the broader population, that these are the kind of, um, industries and skills that the economy needs right now and if it has the capacity to do also foresight, like future mapping, the kind of skills that would be needed by the economy in a decade or so from now. So things like that, um and then the last would be in terms of like, um, in lessening barriers to entry for more productive investments. Um, attracting FD I lowering the costs for businesses to, like, penetrate the market, I think No.

SPEAKER 3
OK, yeah.

SPEAKER 1
And even after so come back to our, um hi.

SPEAKER 6
Uh, we had quite a lot of a big conversation as well. And, um, I guess there was quite a wide range of examples. Um, Gene, generally around, um, why is pro productivity failing? And, um, we were talking about the the globalised world how the terms of trade hasn't necessarily adapted with the times. Um, and sorry. We were also talking about, um, the misallocation of, um, capital. Um, Farzana gave a good example. Um, from her home country in Bangladesh. How? Um, because a lot of the firms get either subsidies or loans from the government or banks. These firms don't necessarily invest themselves in being more productive or innovating. Um, do you and three that even though I mean, we acknowledge again that growth is still happening, but it's not as much as um expected. And, um, we also mentioned we were kind of talking about the, um, stagnation of new ideas because as how it's getting harder and harder to get, um, to have new technology and ideas. But even though, but it's easy to adopt them once they do come out. Um, and we kind of referred to a previous some of us referred to a previous class on, um, the solos swan model, I think. I hope, um And then how can it be improved? Um, probably around in developing countries, uh, around policies, policies around entrepreneurship and promoting, um, problem solving. And that might be through more investment in the education sector. But then, of course, we also raised that developing countries have so much, um to invest in, and I mean, the investment might go towards infrastructure as opposed to innovation. Yeah, sorry. She just said for the online student she just said resource, Dev development. Um and I mean, we had examples from I mean, Bangladesh, Japan, um, and and Australia. I think, um, a few weeks ago, um, they recognise that there's the there's lowering investment in R and D, and that's really needed. Um, and there's also a monopolistic problem of technology around the world. Um, and there might need to be a global response around the cost of technology. I hope I didn't forget anything from the group.

SPEAKER 7
Yeah, I just want to add one minor thing, because we were from different countries and for the rich countries that are performing the best. Um the problem of stagnation is because the people are becoming more consumer, um, based mindset, but, uh, for the rest of the countries, they are struggling to, uh, become more productive. And the problem of that was mm, because of that zombie firm problem that, for example, she was saying that that there are lots of, uh, projects and policies that implemented to support the the firms. But most of the cases this ones failed. And so we were discussing about the case of Japan, for example. It's better to, uh, to apply the that kind of policies that, based on technology, less people involved, like less government involved. Maybe that will help to choose the optimal firms that most likely to perform best in the future.

SPEAKER 3
Yeah, but anywhere else, it's OK.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah. So, uh uh, thank you so much. I can just pick up a few points and express through your presentation and, uh, previously, of course. Uh uh, Tahiri, uh, online. Uh uh. Students presentation is also very much, uh, you know, related. I think here one thing is about two things here. One thing is about, uh, education in human capital continue to be very important that being mentioned, you know, through, uh uh, tahi Tahi's uh uh, presentation. Uh, early on, the second point you mentioned is also important One since we mentioned about, uh, the asymmetrical information. So you mentioned specifically, government actually can play a role in facilitating the flow of information in a way. Now, with the development of a big data, that is even more so right. Government or even non government organisation can handle the data. So therefore, information will be made increasingly available to all players in the marketplace. That is very much related, right to overcome government role in overcome overcoming those kind of, uh, the asymmetrical informations in, uh, in in in development. So this is a very important one. The point I can pick up from you is that I think most of you mentioned several dimension, but very important. One is again echoing the course content we mentioned before. Uh, is about the role of ideas, right? The role of ideas in terms of a technological, uh, development and those idea again, I think you you mentioned, very importantly, again, linking back to what we have learned in the previous lecture about the role of entrepreneurship, right? So as another important
