SPEAKER 0
this material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University in accordance with Section 113 P of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication maybe subject to copyright under the act any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice so you can just log

SPEAKER 1
on at the time and and then to just do the exam and there's any issue. I think the, uh, the the water team, uh, will be will be there to to help you and for me. I will be there at the beginning, probably for 10 to 15 minutes for the reading time. So if you have a question, uh, you can ask at that time or or send through chat and, uh, another thing that is, uh, the the format of the question. In fact, you know we don't have a very set question for everyone. This is the the the questions all being in the from the data bank. So therefore the the system randomly chose or allocate question to each of the students. So the the questions are very different, some somehow different from each other. So you do independently of of, of course. And, uh, so go through that instruction and, uh, carefully. And if you have any issue, ask me or ask about those, uh, how to handle those issues before the, uh uh, examination date. Of course, the the current no pressure issue is the is the essay. That means on on on Monday, next Monday. And, uh, sorry, because I heard this is a public holiday, but I'm sure some of some of you who have continued to work over that, uh, you know, the long weekend, But, uh, but remember this, uh uh uh. Submit red version. That's important. Red version and on time. And, uh so that's the, uh, the suggestion. Any question from you before I start? Yeah. By the way, there's no tutorials on Friday last week. There's no tutorial. Any questions? All right, so let's get the start. And remember, the first written assignment is about the call way right? And that that's why one of the reason why I choose the the similar topic on a similar topic and, uh, for the final for the final lecture or the seminars. So why this is important? Because it's, uh it's very profound, the covid crisis impacting on the process of development. I'll give you a bit of a data to show you that one. So with that one, I think, and then we have a semester long learning of issue in development of policy theory, policy and practise in a way. So therefore, coping with that crisis is a once in the centre of the crisis and draw the implication for economic development. So that's why this is a kind of a final impression I want to give you. You know, when you you finish this course work, there's a big issue there, the question of crisis and then how that fit in and similar things. If you can revisit your written assignment, right, it's the same thing. You argue with the crisis, and then you were thinking that well, how come we could deal with the crisis right in the development of context? So that's the issue, right? So with that one, So let me go through that one. You know, the impact of a a covid pandemic on development. So, uh, why will they be especially impacted? Rich country, poor country? But developing country poor country is especially right. So there's a situation right now. People will think that maybe the crisis is already behind us, right? No, in terms of a long term, some profound impact. You know, those crisis of covid will continue to be with us or continue to be impacting on developing country. So it's not finished yet. It's not completely gone yet. Even though the crisis is not a well, there are still some cases there and there, but, uh but the impact will be continue to be with us. So why does it impose a stress on health care health care in developing countries? That's especially an issue which is rather vulnerable for many developing countries. And again, many development country also put on that agenda a very high agenda in solving the perhaps also not just dealing with the recent one, but also prepare for for the next crisis. So what are the future impact on developing countries? That is one of the concern, right? It's a longer term impact, and perhaps now, in your mind, you can think about those potential. You know, those are challenges, right? And, uh, the things we already quite familiar now with, uh, you know, those are rising debt level, right? And the the inequalities, right. The disruption to the global value chain in responding to, you know, those kind of, uh, you know, crisis. But also in responding to the trend of de globalisation and towards the later on, we can see why global reintegration is so important is so important for not just recurring from the crisis, but also for the economical growth and the development in the post pandemic era, which perhaps you can define that one. It's not a short term. Maybe in the next few years. Right? So that is another one. So what can be done, you know, to help developing country in recurring process. This is a rather thinking about the short term. But as I mentioned, you know, those, uh, process of adjustment and, uh, recovering from the crisis, that can be a long term Uh uh uh, Goal. For many developing countries now, this is the, uh is a broader context, which, uh, we pay attention to the covid pandemic cannot be seen solely as a global health crisis. It's not just a health crisis. The impact on the health, the life code and the functioning of individual and global economies deems it is a humanitarian and economic crisis so much more broader than that one. It is estimated that an additional half a billion people have fallen into poverty due to the pandemic. That's a that's a tremendous right. Remember before crisis, we see so many, so much progress, you know, being going on in reducing the poverty and with the global effort. But basically the crisis actually took us back in a way. So in addition to the significant loss of life, you know, those numbers is already there and the destructions of industry and a broad scale impact on health care system globally. So all these things are basically is a multifaceted OK, you know, it's not just a single health issue, so we have to look at the nature of this crisis and perhaps also in thinking about the future strategy in dealing that way. This is the, uh not well. This is the the impact on U. NDP has an estimation. Under covid the baseline scenario, the pandemic could raise the number of people living in extreme poverty by 44 million. Well, you know, 41 million in 2020 30 Uncertainties are multi, uh, multifold. And under the high damage scenario, this is the baseline scenario. There is a If there's a high damage scenario, the world could say 251 million people driven into extreme poverty by the pandemic, bringing the total number to 1 billion by 2030. This is the the modelling work of U NDP projection. Even though now you know the crisis seems to be behind us. But now, because the process continue there, a negative impact on growth on development and poverty reduction continue to be impacting on one. So these numbers are actually extraordinary. You, you know, World Bank UN and all these, uh, the sustainable global sustainable development goal is to half right. It's actually half the people in the absolute poverty. But now you know the covid crisis, you know, instead of reducing the number is actually increasing people in the poverty. So of course, high damage scenario. You have to think about those, uh, those issue, right? What sort of a condition which enable that that will have, uh, from, uh, from from happening. So those kind of things, uh, I think provided a very, very important background to see that How we can actually look at the the covid and, uh, looks like, you know, crisis is finished, but however, the impact will be lingering on in a way. But if you are not doing a good job and we can see you know, the downside on the poverty inequality is another issue. But the poverty, absolute poverty, per SE will continue to be with us. And we give you reason why that is the case. So think about those, uh, those numbers thinking about that, Uh, that's give you a red perspective in looking at the so called real impact of covid on development. All right, so going through by 2030 perhaps, you know, modelling is said by 2030 perhaps, uh, you know, they can go even beyond that one. So why the developing countries, you know, being affected, you know, especially the deep concern about long term impact the pandemic could have on developing countries with a low income. This is exactly the things that we have just mentioned, right? So, you know, this is a is a long term impact. Those countries rely primarily on se the primary sector, Uh, you know, agriculture and other things and, uh, mining and, uh, and the forestry. So they are particularly impacted by disrupted supply chain and the lower demand for their goods. This is especially in 2021 2020 2021. And, uh, right now, it seems to be, you know, the world economy recovering from those disruption. But however, there's one thing which continues, that is the the process of a dec globalisation. And in a way, you know, some rich country development call is a decoupling, or nowadays they called the risking. And those kind of the forces are working quite a strong, you know, for developing country this traditionally, they are part of the global value chain. Right? So if the de risking or decoupling continues, that means that some industry, those of global value chain will continue to be disrupted. And that is not a That's not healthy. Because, uh, as you know, developing country rather is not a key. You know, roles like, uh, you know, the hub. They just only play a certain part, you know, contributing marginally, uh, to the kind of a global value chain. So in that case, any disruption will affect them quite substantially. Right? So that is the, uh, again the, uh, the estimation of DP on those, uh, the negative impact. Now, again, this is a again, probably the most important one is the is the development of finance. And we know from, uh, from lectures, you know, the financing, uh, development from domestic sources. We also have a lecture and emphasising that the global, you know, the the foreign aid, the international assistance for the development. But then we have a crisis. So you're looking at a similar issues, right? Similar challenges of global finance, but in the context of the covid crisis. So the levels and the trends in the domestic and external financing already fell short of SDG. You know, sustainable development goal spending needs prior to the covid pandemic crisis, even before the crisis that the global finance, that's not a sufficient money. And of course, right now, if you're thinking about another global challenges, which, for example, the climate change climate finance is is another issue right involving the finance issue so the current global context, or risk a significant reduction in the financing available to developing countries in some external primary finance inflow of developing countries. This is the not latest in the in the at the beginning of the crisis and could drop by, You know, this is the amount you know, compared with, uh, even for 2020 you know that the falling of a global finance to developing countries is actually worse than the situation of 2008 global financial crisis. So that means that is it not, you know, health and a normal disruption and etcetera. But the finance the developing country need is also very much compromised because of the crisis. All right, this will have, uh, something a kind of a long term uh uh, implications for that one. And, uh oh. Sorry. So what is the implication? So lack of development of finance exci base the risk of a major development setback that would in turn, increase our vulnerability to future pandemic climate change and other global public event where official development finance is an important counter cyclical force in the short term, and tax revenues remain the only long term variable sources of financing for many public services. No single source of development finance can take up this challenge along. So we know many developed countries have a kind of a different sources, right? Very difficult in dealing with that occur the crisis. So of course we can see that, uh, there's AAA cry, you know, for that, uh uh, you know, the removing of the debt repayment and for many developed countries, we already touched on that one in the lecture. But we can talk about that. Uh uh, in the in this discussion as well. So what is the impact of a poor country right now? So it's not an update to very much update, But you can look at what happened at that time. It is International Monetary Fund, right? And, uh so, uh, well, 90 countries do 2020 2020. But, you know, the, uh, 24 the low income member countries are benefiting from the immediate debt relief. This is what happened in the middle of the crisis. But we are talking about the development of finance, right? The need beyond the crisis, in a way, is still, you know, those kind of the challenge, uh, continue to be there. Healthcare system is especially as we mentioned that one. Perhaps you can come up with some macroeconomic data to show, especially in terms of growth, for example, in terms of a trade in terms of the inflow of foreign assistance in terms of perhaps also trade and FD I. So all these numbers will show, you know, as compared with the pre pandemic, uh, period right to see what will happen and, uh, now and and it continues the case. So again, there's a certain uncertainties in the global economy and, uh, post the pandemic, right? So some of them may not be happening. You know, that will be good, right? But some of them are, perhaps have a high chance to occur, so that will be not good for developing country Number one is the possible global economic recession. But now the international agencies are not talking about the global recession anymore. They are talking about a global economic slowdown. This slowdown is widespread. Slow down. And, uh, the, uh especially now being driven by the major economies, right, And, uh, due to so many reasons and the causes for the slowdown, the IMF has a projection and, uh, perhaps the next three or five years. And, uh, the global growth will be relatively slow in a way. And, uh, previously, people are talking of prediction that India and China were contributing to about 40% of global growth this year, perhaps also 14 year. But now they are making adjustment to that one because the China's growth is so slow down a bit. I think India's growth is also moderating over time and the United States last year, perhaps of the first quarter. And but you can see that, uh, there's actually the actual growth rate in the United States is also falling behind what the market expected. The growth where obviously, is lower than the market expectation in previous quarters. The actual growth rate is always higher than market expectation in United States, but this is the first quarter of this year for the first time, it actually below the market expectation. So why is that? Does that reflecting? There's a growth is trending down. They are the major economies, right? And the Asian economy also, you know, struggling a bit because the global macroeconomic imbalances, especially centering on the high inflation, high interest rate right and facing the pressure for currency depreciation. But also the pressure for the capital for life and the things that we discussed before. So not in the recession yet. But the economic slow down will have a some negative impact on the developing countries. The recurring process perhaps also beyond and the current round of interest rate rises. This is what I just mentioned, right? So you know, the inflation of pressure, the currency depreciation and the capital flight. And, uh, for those things, developing countries somehow become very vulnerable. Why? Because it cannot it out of their control. Basically, government in developing country cannot take in control about this situation because the global interest rate is being set by the major economy, the central bank, the Federal Reserve. Right? So it's out of your control in a way. So what we hope is that this is called macroeconomic global macro, coordinating in a way that means that in setting the interest rate policy in United States, perhaps they should think about other countries, the situation as well, emerging and developing, right? Right now it's not the case. So therefore, perhaps, of course, the market not predicting there's some kind of a rate cut this year, right? And, uh, So hopefully, if that is the case, perhaps, uh, developing country will have, at least in the short run next year or so have some more breathing space in terms of, uh, you know, managing their policy and, uh, the financial crisis one financial crisis. This is actually related to the following one, which is, uh, in the lectures of this course we already mentioned, right? Everyone knows, you know, we have a more than 300% of global debt over global GDP. That's the fact we have. So therefore, when you have a very high debt level, that means you have a very high leverage in terms of, uh, you know, mobilising the resources to boost the growth that the leverage is. But leverage is very high that become a vulnerable or prone to some kind of potential, the financial crisis. It all happened in the past, especially 2008 that have a very high leverage of a of A financing investment and a similar situation right now. Unless probably we don't see, uh, very much very quick fix on the global debt issue. Let me try to reduce the leverage, right. We don't see that one. So But in in fact, now, the major economies, like, uh, like China now is following a similar trend issuing a huge public debt in order to boost the economy. So similar things that happened following the what happened to Japan, you know, 30 years ago continues until now, and similar things happen in the United States, basically, you know, debt driven in a way. So, uh, the central authority, Uh uh, not so much rely on other means of boosting growth. So it's all on debt. So which is not, uh, the healthy. And from this course, we also learn from a developing country, right? The situation develop kind of similar things. Relative high debt. So therefore, there's a potential possibility for running into some kind of, uh, the financial difficulties and food and energy crisis. This is from time to time. I think it's been since 2008 before 2008. People become a very, you know, a complacent in a way, seeing that perhaps, you know, the debt level. Sorry. The food is, uh, more than you know adequately satisfied the global need. But on 2008 at that year, there's a sudden search of a food pricing. And then, you know, international agencies and the countries involved somehow being called in as a surprise to say Wow, you know, the supply continue to be an issue, because this is the food is different from other commodities, right? Without the food, you know, the famines and the starvation, the shortage of food, it can happen so and then immediately after 2008. And, uh, the international call for the, uh, for the producers, especially agricultural producing country, to actually to strengthen those supply side and, uh, to in order to meet that demand. And, uh, the prediction was seeing that the food crisis, perhaps the down track, will continue to be there anyway, that against the the technological, uh, background of that one. And, uh, of course, the, uh the R of a political tension, the decoupling and also de risking in a way and in all at all, Frank right? Trade investment now increasingly finance and now increasingly related to so called strategic supply of resources like a key critical minerals. So all these things are happening in a way, and you can think about those are the global value chain also. But when you have a added consideration of geopolitical tension that can reorganise, you have to reorganise those production right And, uh, may not be. Perhaps, you know, through the impulse substitution policy that will be not conducive to the so called the resource allocation in a global setting. And as a result of that one you can see in certain, you know, the distortion, the inefficiencies and waste and irregularities is all happen. That's the resulting from lecture 10 when we talk about import substitution policy. So those are the uncertainties and being associated with the current the world economy. Those uncertainty, of course, will impact on developing countries down the track. So, I, I like to raise this issue for you to think about down the track because we're not finished yet, right? And, uh, so the things that will continue like that so developing country should be developing and should be aware of those potential. Uh uh uh uh uh. Certain in a way to come up with a policy in dealing with, uh, any kind of, uh adversities that could occur in the process of, uh, next phase of development. And, uh, this one, I I probably I can skip that one because, uh, it's just a seeing the differences between the poor and the rich country in terms of the provision of public health, Those things. So that's why the crisis will make developing countries so vulnerable, right in dealing with the crisis. And, uh, now, what is the long term again? This is also the health issue. I think a more developing countries should probably ensure public policy to spend more on building in building that public health. Right. And, uh, because we we cannot claim that, you know, the crisis is beyond, you know, perhaps the future crisis can occur. So, uh, again, you know, that is a very, very much a requirement for that one. Now, what are the future impact on developing country? This kind of, uh, the, uh the, uh the crisis so likely to see an increase in immigration from a developing country because of the crisis, the disruption. So lay off workers are, you know, like to migrate right in a way to other parts of the world, reducing the labour force, but also for the intaking country countries again facing enormous problem. You can see what happened to Australia. Now, the debate about immigration and, uh, very become a very political issue for the country and from 1 million to 250,000 next year. So substantial cut of the intake of that one. Because what? Because the because the domestic uh uh uh uh politics evolve for developing country is similar things so very much a trend, so rather kind of a disruptions in a way. So if developing countries are losing their workforce, the economic recovery will be slower. And, uh, and the prospect of paying off debt become far more overwhelming. So it's very much related. No, what can be done So again, when you're writing your some of the you know, the the written assignment at the beginning of this course right, it's a similar challenge. I think that some students already did very well in a way or relatively well in identifying those issue but of the challenge, but also come up with the policy right when you are arguing those kind of a policy and you can see you know, those are the pressing issues. Why? This thinking is not just thinking about, um I think in the final exam, perhaps, you know, the open ended question. We have a similar questions like this, right? So the covid crisis developing in a global context Now, we are actually not in the middle of crisis. We are in the post pandemic crisis. So what are the policy suggestion in thinking? You should be able to perhaps so at least give a few, right? And, uh uh uh, analysis and the discussion in looking at that one UN, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs were the covid threat to undo the progress on poverty and the sustainability that have been made since the current sustainable development goal were introduced on 2020 15. We already mentioned that one. So one solution could be that for developed country and the banks to consider writing off existing debt for developing country where possible. They are doing that right now. But of course. But that number is very high, right? As we know in the course, right? So therefore, developing countries should not be, of course, you know, should be privatised. Uh, you know, penalised for defaulting on payments by further restricting their economic through new trade barriers or restoring the resource industry. Those kind of things and the people at that time talking about a new Marshall Plan. The Marshall Plan is the immediate after the Second World War and, of course, under the leadership of the United States, you know, come up with a huge plan in financing of being a restructuring reconstruction of Europe. And, uh, the money seems to be a sound that great. But it's, uh, according to the current standard, but it's a very significant for the recovering process of the European, uh uh, era, Uh uh uh, the area. So whether in the post pandemic, you know, global community, perhaps now, right now, it seems to be OK. But down the track, if the, uh, the situation is worsening, resulting from all the uncertainties, we just highlight, right? And then perhaps at that time, there may need some kind of a bigger plan rather than just about the individual donors, you know, writing off the certain debt for certain country. But perhaps the more comprehensive strategy. But we the community, in dealing with those, uh, the debt issue but also other challenges and facing the developing country some key messages. The crisis crisis is a hidden developing country at a critical moment. Why is that one? Because the developing country, after decades of, uh, you know, development, right? Already accumulated so much, you know, achievement resulting from those policy, the changes central. But then the crisis hit, and then you can see all the challenges are facing those developing countries. The crisis at risk of creating a major setback in financing for the sustainable development. Sustainable development is the goal, as we highlight in the lecture one right, it is a sustainable, but that goal being compromised by the crisis. And you can I think we ask you to identify all these challenges right in the written assignment the way you do. So you are now in a position to know those challenges, right? So the the the goal can be compromised in a way. And, uh, because, you know, domestic resources mobilisation will suffer as an economic activity is reduced. Not to mention about, uh maybe later on, when we summarise the course, we can see there is actually a lot of a structural adjustment as well the technology. The seminar, the previous seminar topic on the digital divide right, is all very relevant. So it's not just a crisis per E, but the the global context impose the pandemic work. That's the case. So that means that any big issue, you know, the the big changes can poses enormous challenges. Right? Technology? We already mentioned structural adjustment all these things, right? So it's not just the just the crisis. In the short term, the official development of finance should be leverage to contain the job in other sources of financing in the medium term, actors in development, finance and beyond need to collaborate closely, you know, building back better for a more equitable, sustainable and resilient world. So OECD has a long history in helping developing countries, where established the policy setting and the capability that those kind of a building experience, including investing in human capital. And so we are at a critical moment. So that means that all the things the policy agenda, you know, being implemented in the past can we revive them in a new setting? Because the because the crisis because of the uncertainty. So therefore we do need a perhaps new thinking, new thinking in dealing with the new challenges so that that's the thing. Uh, can you remember that one? So when you if you ask this kind of question, you have to think of not just a very specific question, per SE, right? Certain policy. I'd like you to have a bigger picture in looking at the post pandemic world the challenge of a developing country. So organise your thought in addressing those questions, revisit your recent assignment you have written before, right? So again, you know, thinking about those, uh, similar topic basically 12 topics, right. We are going through in addition to the lecture. So we have covered 12 topics. Those topics are are relatively new and, uh, you know, it's a it's a it's not a part of a lecture, But again, it's a part of, uh, you know, supporting those, uh, the the the Lectures, in a way. So thinking of going through that one is also very important because each of the seminars we have a series of questions as well. Right? So those questions is the one we we we like you to to, uh, to pay attention to as well and Well, this is also important. In a way, the the pandemic can lead to some kind of a two directions, right? One direction is that it is so vulnerable. So therefore, let's try to protect ourselves, right? Moving away from those global value chain in a way. And the global donation another one is that the crisis actually show how interconnected we are. That means we actually, the word is still very much connected, right? So the connection or we call this economic reintegration is actually can be very important part or a part of our efforts in recovering from the crisis. Perhaps also rebuild the country, rebuild the country in the in the post pandemic world. And, uh, but also how deep you know, the asymmetric, you know, between countries run in many different dimensions. Uh, some countries are doing well right in mobilising resources to deal with and recover from the crisis. And, uh, some also offering better the social protection to those most severely affected and getting access to the V and all these things. But many countries are not in that position, so you can see the interconnectedness in the sense of, you know, dealing with the health crisis but also interconnectedness in dealing with what with the dealing with the global recovery, Right in the economic sense. If I ask you that one, can you give me one quick answer to see which part of the lectures can actually enable us to strengthen that answer In talking about, uh, connectiveness and the global reintegration very quickly. Sorry. Free trade? No. In the lecture, the context of the lecture very specific. You can have using a one part of the lecture to explain this, uh, to answer this question. Free trade, Of course, going with a free trade is that one. But there's another theoretical underpinning for this connectiveness. Just a recent lecture. I also emphasising that one when I going through that one, any thought, Sorry. Globalisation. That's the same thing. Free trade, globalisation and et cetera. But there's also the conceptual underpinning for arguing that that is very much necessary. I'll give you a good sorry terms of trade terms of trade. I'll give you a hint. So the balance of payments constrains growth. 48. Sorry for an assistant. Six More than a formula. Can you remember in a formula there is a There is also a little Z. What is that? That is the global income growth. If a saloon is what if a saloon is the income at of demand for your own goods? So that shows what that shows the global interdependence, meaning what other countries are better off means you also will be better off in a way. So you the growth of other countries also can benefit your own basically message because that directly that if a law directly contributing to your own economic growth, can you remember now that's the That's the key message from that one of the key message. We talk about the terms of trade. We talk about the price analysis of demand for both import and export, and we also talk about the import income income alys of demand for for import of your own country. But importantly is that if it's a law, so at that time, I was saying that that formula is especially relevant for the current global context, right? Very relevant, because everyone was thinking about their try to protect their own by doing so, you know, we kind of further away living away because it's, uh, this is worsening the situation. It wasn't the global growth. So everyone will suffer if you follow that one. And we do have experience of that one between the two great wars, right? And 29 to 33. Great depression, country basically falling. Those be my neighbours, right? And so those policy protecting their own at the expense of others. And in the end, you know, everyone suffer, So the similar situation. So if you answer that question, you can use that the balance of payments, constraint, growth, right, highlighting that why the interdependence? That's basically shows that the global growth will benefit for everyone or other countries growth so. But right now, the de risking and the decoupling is that you growth is actually compromise us. So therefore, we have to protect our own, you know, market. Those one to some extent, is a politically popular in a way, but economically, it is not at all. But if you learn it from an economic principle for us for learning the economic, you know, uh, for students and, uh, you have to think about it in a in a rather rational way, thinking about what theory tells us and and then you can make a judgement about certain policies, right? Is that clear? That's a very, very good example for you to use the knowledge or a part of the knowledge we have learned in answering a certain question. And here it is about a global interconnectedness and the global. So when we were seeing that Reg globalisation free trade, Reg, globalisation is actually part of that answer. So down the track, what sort of a strategy and, uh, you know can save somehow, you know, make what better in terms of growth, the prosperity, welfare, et cetera. That's one of the key issue. But it's a very divided right now. All right, free trade or not, free trade, globalisation or DEG, globalisation. And, uh, how you balance the domestic, you know, those kind of a political interactions and, uh, with a with a vis a vis, you know, the rest of the world. So it's all very contentious for developing countries. I think this year again, you know, we talk about the free trade, right, the dynamic and static against from trade so in the way. And but the dynamic side is actually associated with this kind of a positive thinking to continue to support globalisation, economic reintegration rather than wow. This is the crisis. Let's move away from those connections, right? Try to protect ourselves and make us less vulnerable in terms of those global you know, changes. And that, perhaps, is the wrong thinking in a way. But anyway, you can think about that one yourself, you answering those questions. So prepare for the future. Because this is the complex crisis, you know, rather, you know. So only in understanding this complexity will we find the key to provide a better response in the future. I I already mentioned this point, so it's not a single dimension, right? It's a it's a complex and, uh so but crisis always play a role in transforming. You know, the way of thinking in the in terms of policy setting, but also transforming the things we normally do but also the offers opportunity, right. It offers opportunity and, uh, through crisis and, uh, crisis also perhaps also can facilitate dramatic structural reform of structural changes. So, uh, in in normal circumstances, politicians perhaps were not in the position or have a determination to carry out a very deep structural changes. But when you have a crisis that perhaps you can actually offer that opportunity. So those are the things right for inequality education now, So a challenge ahead. The big question is that if this housing crisis of a century has been enough to provoke the real change, this is the point. I just mentioned whether that is enough crisis to provoke the real ch the real change. If, uh, I don't know whether some of you read the article we wrote on the, uh on the on the covid right, how we can turn that from crisis into opportunity, right? It it's the same thing. And, uh, in thinking about what sort of the big changes necessary and why this is actually opportunity for country to do it. So those challenge and opportunity is not just facing a particular country, it's actually facing everyone. It doesn't matter if you are a rich country or poor country, because they all facing the structural adjustment, those policies, but also perhaps the prospect of global reintegration, but also very importantly, this one we talk about in one of the seminars before to watch to embrace the new technology. And this is a very big challenge is still unfolding. And the implication for developing countries or using the A I the technology is a lot of uncertainties, right? But at the same time to refer to the lecture we mentioned, uh, when we discuss the digital issues, the challenges. So it's comprehensive in thinking about those, uh, those policies. So the jury is still out. Many initiative and policy recommendations have been aired, but more political will is needed to take them to harbour. That means that that's the political determination, right? And the policy that and the policies for the the implementation of the policy accordingly. That's another one. So, uh, that's a seminar. And, uh, let me quickly go through the, uh, the the lectures. I I'm sure some some of you already listen to the recorded lecture so I won't go through all of them, But let me pick up a few few points and, uh, for that to conclude Mhm. So any questions before I we start, We we we

SPEAKER 2
have, uh, the group decided today, right? So I'll finish this part, and that's it. And we can talk about Right. So there you go. Through this, uh, this one here, let me ask you How do you listen to the recording? Yeah, part of it. Part of it. So it's a very useful for for you to. And I think now is, uh is, uh, we have this technology used to be really and and and you have no sense. But now the the technology allows us to keep the recording and in case, for example, for future, some of you may become a leader. Some of you may become, you know, teaching the issues in government policy. You know, those materials are very useful. Uh, both that the seminar and a tutorial design is all being part of that. So in summary, I go through the first two slides,

SPEAKER 1
give you the, uh, the old topic we have covered right in the, you know, for each course. And, uh, I think in the recorded lecture I, I did go through and give you the summary about each of them, so we will be very useful, and I can do it again in another half hour, but, uh, I think it is. Let's save that time. And, uh, so to have a probably more discussion later on. So all all of them, and I think the key of this one. You remember in today's seminar discussion, I use at least two example right to illustrate how the knowledge we have learned in these lectures can be utilised in answering those questions. So this is the the whole exercise of a written assignment written essay and also the final exam, the final exam. We have a three type of question in a way. Three type of questions. The 1st 10 question is a rather straightforward. It's not a multiple choices that you still have to answer it in a rather simple way. Just 10 questions. Very straightforward. The second type of question is that you need more analysis all right again, you know, beyond the the the time you allocate the answer, the second type of question is beyond, you know, uh, you higher, you know, than the first type of question, right? So, uh, most substantial. But there's also final part. The final part is the, uh is one of the key issue. The key question is open ended. Open ended question like we have discussed today, right facing the post pandemic. What and how you know, developing country are coping with those environment in dealing with other crisis, right to achieve in a broader sense, you know, the global sustainable, you know, development goals. Something more broader is open ended. If you listen to the seminars every single week, every single week, we highlight a very important issue like today. Why were you choosing the covid? Because this is actually happening. This is the crisis we are going through. But now we are facing the challenge in the post pandemic world. So therefore, you learn this course. It's not just a static in a way, using certain theory and et cetera, you have to have a vision there. You have to have a vision. You have to have a perspective apart from the concrete knowledge we have learned from this course in answering the final question. So the final question is like an essay type of question. Like, you know, write a short the essay. But that essay is that because it's given the time, so therefore you have to utilise those perspective, all right, using the knowledge we have learned, if you can link it back to the the things I mentioned, if so is one example about a global interdependence, right? That's just typical example. It shows you can actually learn. You can actually use the knowledge you learn in answering a certain question, right? So there are so many other examples. There are so many other dimensions you can learn. So that's why it's a very good opportunity for everyone in the class towards the end. Now to reflect to reflect what you have learned right, what you have learned and how those knowledge are useful not just the purpose of answering the exam question, but for your for your future development, for your thinking about those policy issues. In a way, those are the key messages. And of course, as a result, I think, uh, I also ask the students, you know, whether the questions is both through learning a particular course, you yourself are being transformed in a way, basically new perspective in looking at the scene, right? So that's the That's a message, so I won't go through them that way. And again, you know, there's a few quotations very powerful, uh, through my reading of many other books so I can extract those, uh, important message. So, uh, uh, for the convenience of yours, a student. But it's a very useful, for example. And, uh, if you are being asked the question about economic development, right, what is that? Is that about GDP and income inequality and other things? So economic development is a highly multifaceted, nonlinear, past dependent, dynamic process that involve the systematically shifting interactions pattern among different aspects of development and therefore requires the predictable change in policy and institutions over time, very profound. This kind of summarise the things we have learned. This course, right, we're talking about this, uh, multidimensional things we're talking about is is the pattern is the interaction and many things actually being related. It's not just talking about the foreign aid or trade or FD I or financing per SE. They are actually interacting, and that pattern is also shifting over time. And by doing so, you can see this is not a linear our thinking, especially students you know so familiar with the quantitative analysis. So our thinking is actually is very much a linear right, because the model estimation give us a is kind of a linear path to what they want. But development process is not. There's an up and a down. You know, there's a non nonlinear that changes right, the past dependence, but also the dynamic process. So those are the things I want you to take away from this course, and we have done more or less done it, right? But But the takeaway message is that how and how you can understand the economic development, that the process so that that's the key. OK, so those are the things you can you can you can use, right? And, uh, requires the predictable changes. One is the policy, the other is the institution, right? We all talk about that one in the, uh, through this course and, uh, no I. I can Yeah. Another one is on the goal. One debate appears to be at the last coasting towards a consensus developing nation must not focus their energies on the growth rate of their GDP, but they should instead try to achieve human development and a comprehensive development. This is the If I ask you, this message is closely related to which theory or the message by whom I think I mentioned in lecture one. Not in this room. In the in the western. Can anyone remember very similar. It's about It's not the GDP per SE. Who? Who? Who? Yes, Doesn't matter. Checking like one now Now, let me tell you, is the capability Theory by Amata S. Remember that Amata said is a Nobel laureate in economics development. Similar thing is a human development, and Amma Hasan is more related to the human freedom, right? It's a freedom as a development and the three level of human capital in a way, right? The first of all is for human development. Nothing is not a the second level is the participation in the societal development community societal development through human capital. The third level is what is we normally understood. According to the neuro classical growth theory is the human capital as a factor of production in contributing to economic growth. It's the lowest level in understanding. Our ma made it very clear. So therefore we should aim very high through human capital, through education, about human development themselves, right, And, uh, about how you cope with a visa way yourself with the with the word, the societal development. Those are the red perspective in looking at the issue of a development, right? Not so much about memorise a certain theory and a certain facts and et cetera, is the vision Let me emphasise again is the perspective OK? Those are the things, uh, again, if you learn that way that actually truly transform transform yourself into another, you know, living being which I regarded as so important for our young people. You know, like you and, uh, again, reasons I won't have time to go through that one. Dealing with inequality. I probably won't have that one. There are certain area which is under emphasised from a previous decades of development experience. And, uh, but now, down the track, investing in people environmental management, which is again the challenge. We have a, you know, special lecture and not the other similar topic and the managing financial risk again, you know, very much related to today's discussion and the securing good governance. You know, this is always looks like old issue, but again, it's also a new issue. And with a new dimension in handling that process shifting, I won't go through, you know, fifties seventies and the nineties. And now you know, you can see the the tide is always a shifting towards the basic, uh, you know, approach to economic development, whether it's a pro market or kind of a a government driven and whether it's a role or institution or role of the market versus the role of institution, the role of government, all these things or B is continuous. Right? So this is a related what we call in the in the lectures about the Washington Consensus and, uh, to the post Washington consensus. Right, So you can think about the element of that one, right? You can also think about why you know all the project based on following those Washington consensus are failed, right? The failure is due to what? So those are the questions you need to think about, right? Why they failed. Look at the specific context of Washington consensus. Brilliant physical discipline, right. Trade liberalisation, ownership reform, decentralisation, setting the exchange rate and the interest rates according to market supply and demand. You name it. So all these elements are so relevant, but taking as a whole why it failed and by the way, fee the fee fee of those, uh, consensus, uh, means that what? Whether developing country should continue to pay respect to the certain element of that one. So it's not very clear cut, right? You reject the Washington consensus and you reject all the elements of the policy prescription? No. Right. So when we talk about the dealing with the rising debt and the crisis, of course, you know physical discipline is is a is there, Right? So those kind of things and, uh, ownership change decentralisation relating to the incentive. And, uh, you know, all these things will be very much related, right? Those kind of a nonlinear, the past dependent. And, uh, and and the institutional. Uh uh uh uh Process. Anyway, so that's the thing. Uh oh. honour professor Harvard, and, uh, it's great. I think he passed away now, and, uh, but we have some personal encounter with him and, uh, very humorous, uh, professor, but I won't tell you that the joke he made and, uh, so very simple messages here. Right? Res respect for market forces. The limited scope of government action. A focus on basic needs and opportunity for the poor rather than the income distribution. Per SE. Why is that one? If you're emphasising the income distribution and then remember the topic, we covered in the one of the seminars. Is the trade off between what you should know that one trade off BT M. That's right, efficient and equity. So that means if you don't handle that, the trade out well and then you just focus on income distribution. It won't help. Efficiency will suffer. Productivity will suffer. Eventually, you can see, uh, the outcome of that one, the importance of a source of a growth analysis. You all be able to do that. In fact, when we talk about the growth accounting right when we talk about this, uh, the TFP, that's the thing. You have to identify the sources of growth. Now you will be able to do it right. Why is that? It's not just the source of growth, because when you identify the source of growth, you can identify where are the opportunities or where are the The things are lacking in a particular country which are not conducive to economic growth. So therefore you address those kinds of sources of drivers for growth and the policy that promote real cost reduction. You know, the transaction cost the productive cost and rather than increase the cost of production, we know in government, you know, we want to do the all the things right. But however, as a result of a government action, the business transaction costs are increasing all the time, so it's not serve that purpose. So Professor Harper was saying that no, you have to reduce the cost of, uh, of of production. That actually can be a test of your policy, that the policy promote open economy. He wrote this very long ago. But now the open economy in a post pandemic word continue to be relevant, right? So at least here, just a few message. Very simple, not sophisticated at all, but very relevant for students learning the issues in development policy. This is what you do is give you a bit of a guidance, the guidance in terms of, uh, the, uh the overall thinking about the development of process and the policies. That's why we we well, you know, you know, 2000. This is even before the crisis, the financial crisis. But he was thinking that global integration remains the key prerequisite for economic development. But there is now a lot more to it than just throwing border open, reaping the gains from openness requires the full complement of institutional reform. It's not just the opening, right, per SE. It's the institutional building making the system are compatible with the global practise global nouns. And to be able to reap the benefit, either build on the dynamic, static or dynamic against that, what we will learn, right? Some students are, you know, writing the essay on that topic. Similar thing, right? So for those right, it's not just a simple the gains from trade, you know, static or dynamic is how to reap those benefits and by building the right institution all in terms of the institutional reform of that one. So I think it is also quite powerful. And, uh so what sort of a good institution we we we talk about that one in the lecture and so I won't go through them from ey. And, uh, well, this is the, uh, some students also chosen the topic on the institution. So about, uh, how the institution, you know, good institution or bad institution and, uh, why they fail. That book is a very popular book among the, you know, students. During this course, the solution to the economic and political failure of nations today is to transfer their extractive institution towards inclusive one, leading to some positive feedback and virtuous circle virtuous circle. We repeat it in the early lecture many times, right? I won't repeat here. So it's a test about, uh, how you define the virtuous circle. But also the positive feedback, how you can see the positive feedback can can occur. That means you have to answer the question. You have to have a certain mechanism, right? You have to have a certain mechanism for doing that. One and institutional building is not a very just abstract, you know, you you know, the market compatible and et cetera you actually the design the institution, which allows that the mechanism to work to providing those either positive or negative feedback. So therefore decision makers can take into account those feedback and to to adjust their policies or rebuilding the institution. So again, you can look at that one. There is also article associated with that, uh, a part of the analysis, uh, talking about the idea population institution, and such by Charles Jones and, uh, by Charles Jones. Anyway, it is immortal. A very powerful, uh article to read through to understand in many dimensions, especially related to the endogenous economic growth model. But in the in the in the development of context. And, uh so those are the things. Well, I won't go through this one. And, uh and, uh, this is also very interesting. Right? Is from Roderick is the contextual approach and why you know why you're doing this course. We have a four topics right for you writing the essay written assignment and thinking about all the tutorial question and the similar question. So when you're doing that one, you remember this. The practise of development economics is at the crest of a significant opportunity not only for the reunification of the field long divided between macro and micro development economies, but also for the progression from a presumptive approach with a ready made universal recipes to diagnostic and a contextual approach. It's not a because it's so much complex for the development experience, right, part dependent nonlinearity all these things. So you have to have a specific the contextual approach based on experimental and policy innovation. If you carry out to fr, this transformation would represent an important advance in how development of policy is carried out well, that is the same, right? We are talking about the issues in development of policy. But we do have a theory. Traditional way of thinking is to allow us to use that theory right to apply in a particular context. That's OK. That's a standard you. Either you can through macro and old macro doesn't matter, but this is a traditional way of approaching. But Roderick was arguing that now we actually see a sea change that say change. I think now, if you look at this one just to reflect what we have learned throughout this semester and you can see that it actually is, uh, we're actually undergoing this change. If you feel you can feel you can tell that's change. Brilliant. You, you, you you won't waste your time. You know, learning for the whole semester of this subject matter, right? That means there's something significant to change it. That's what I mean. You know, through this course learning you transform yourself in a way with a new vision, new perspective, new way of understanding of the things. But here I think it's a diagnostic. It's the contextual approach. Become a very important. Why is that Because it's so significant in a way, it's important even in how development policy is carried out. I don't know whether you are is clear or not because, uh, everyone talking about the policy right? We know the policy issues right, But in development, the context, this is the same change. And, uh, so it's become a more relevant of your analysis and your study, and, uh, you make a great sense about what you have learned. That's basically if you take that message to home if you make a great sense, OK, what you have learned. And, uh, this one is a long one. I won't go through. Some are settled is the lecture wire already, and some are not settled. So I think that towards the end there's a few things, right. Marshall, a Ford Marshall in the principle of economic with the question of whether poverty is necessary, gave its highest interest in economic. So it's not something this, of course, more than 100 years ago, and but he he's got a vision, And, uh, the economics is not just a textbook. It's not just the I Tower, you know, talking about a certain derivation about the modelling, the ma Ma model or even sophisticated estimation the modelling thing. But this one is gave the highest. And, uh, can we understand those VI vision Very visionary scholar more than 100 years ago, the context will be different. But the vision, the the wisdom, is the same in understanding What? What? What is the matter? So remember, in lecture one, we were talking about the shoes, the saying right? Can anyone remember that one? It's the same thing when she was talking about the most people in the world are poor and are living in, uh, are poor. So therefore, when you when you talk about economic development is actually really matters, he refer also to the agricultural economic as well, the same thing. And while you learn economics that really matter, it's the same thing. Now this is again the illustration of that one and the concern Well, this is again we already mentioned several times. So about, uh, rising global debt. So you can look at that way and, uh, the role of a public policy. You know, we offer this course in a public policy school right so therefore, you can always draw those kind of insight, right in looking at the way. Emphasising of the role of a public policy is not simply the adoption of a government action aimed at giving money away or taxing the rich and helping with the poor, but as a part of implementing a new global social contract which enables all countries involved in recognising the common interest and the challenges of the humanity, such as the development, poverty reduction, climate change and the welfare of the future generation, and follow the principle of a fair competition and respect for the interests of others. So, yes, public policy relating the spending, of course, and the public policy relating the taxation. You know all this, of course. But also there's a ground nobler objective of how the public policy can be implemented. And that's the message. And, uh, and again, uh, increasingly, nowadays, people are talking about, uh, the global social contract. And, uh, why is that? And, uh, within the country, you can talk about a social contract, but globally because we basically are facing the common challenge. So all the humanity share the common interest, right? It's not a specific countries. They are their challenge, but it's a common to everyone. So if it is a common to everyone, we need to solution global solution. But Glo global solution is so difficult to implement. Why? Because the country have their own ideas, their position right. Their circumstances are very different. Those things that need to be overcome. But how you can overcome that one. You need those kind of a global social contract. So if that being put in place, you know, people have a very clear understanding the consensus of working towards those goals. And, uh, that's why you know, when when remember, we talk about the CO. But but no house, Right? And, uh, really no house in one of the lectures. Sorry. One of the seminars, right? Why is that one? He got a Nobel price for his contribution in economic or climate change. And he was saying that why the Kyoto Protocol is not effective? You know why the Paris agreement on climate change is not effective? It's because we don't share. You know, this. There's a lot of non bonding. No, no marketing strength. So he proposed the climate collab. We discussed that one right in one of the the seminars. But do you think that the idea of climate collapse it is a great idea? It may be great because the imposing the penalties for country are not involved as a part of that one. And, uh, but again, it's, uh it's based on the, you know, the the prisoner dilemma, right? And, uh, all the free riding, those kind of argument. But better still, if we have this global social contract, you know, country were voluntarily working towards achieving those goals, that would be brilliant. Why? Because those understanding about a common interest or the common challenge surpassed the narrowly focus the domestic interest or individual interest. Right, That's great. So I think the message I want to convene to you that when you again, you know, take away from this course is to have those grand idea the vision and because poverty reduction, for example, here, my gentleman Yeah, the poverty reduction development is a part of that understanding. Can you link that one? So that's why I think I think in a seminar one I mentioned, I'll give you a few things to convince you why learning this course is important. So while I conclude this chapter today, this lecture today save a message. I want to convey that message to you again, saying why learning this course is important. And of course, there's a lot of criteria right to measure about your performance in a way. But I think there's a certain things about the vision and the perspective, and, uh, and a certain approach in looking at the issue from now on will be very different and compare with before you're doing this one, of course, many other courses doing the same thing, but because this one is a development, right in a way. So, uh, some kind of an over a bit about why that the subject matter is important. So if now you are being convinced so I probably you know, it was the efforts right for doing things. But if you are not still not so convinced, that means that we have a long way, you know, continue to learn. I'm sure on down the track and one way or another, at some stage you will recognise those message saying that why those messages are important and, uh, so going through the, uh, the content and linking them all together. And in answering a particular question, that's the way to digest more fully the course content. You have learned this one I just mentioned right, So I won't go through. That one is actually an update. And previously the, uh, the publication date is not updated. So this morning I just did that one for the paper again. You can read that one because it's in the post pandemic. How we can actually turn the crisis into opportunity. That's the subtitle of the paper. And by doing so, you can see what actually needed to be done. All the three things right we mentioned is all covered in the lectures, structural reform technology and a global reintegration. So all these things is very much related, right? So you can look at that one. And, uh, German Keynes was also thinking this is actually very much related to what we have just mentioned. And we know the economy way of thinking. Everyone was doing economic, you know, in the room. The theory of economic does not furnish a body of a settled conclusion no immediately applicable to policy. It is a method rather than a doctrine and apparatus of the mind, a technique of thinking, which helps is a processor to draw correct conclusions. So when you think about that way, just reflect. I have just said, you know, this is actually reflecting. It's not my lot of my own thinking. It's actually the great gent, you know, also a great scholar in understanding the way of economic. It's not a body of a settled conclusion, but a lot of our students try to learn the the theory Got a conclusion? A. Apply those one to the reality. That's it. They finished the job. But Keynes was as No, it's not. It's not for the immediately applicable to policy. Remember the contextual right? Contextual those kind of things. So it is a method rather than a doctrine. It's a paradise of the mind and the tech of thinking. Now what I just said is actually makes sense, right, because this is the job that can say so. I think it's just hope is because that's exactly what I have just said. That makes more sense for you in understanding the course content, but more broadly in understanding the way that you learn economics, how that can make sense to us, right? And in terms of, uh, are we just satisfied with borrow and or learn some conclusion based on the theory and apply to that one? So much things, you know, failed right for those approach, including the Washington consensus, is the same thing textbook conclusion applied, including the failure of the collapse of the Soviet Union and also the, you know, the market oriented reform imposed on the country Russia, and to do so and the failed is all, you know, using the textbook, the conclusion and to the to the reality transition of developing. So those are the things I like you to give you the final the message. And this is another one investing in people. So that's very important. And, uh, again, I might have said this one in lecture one similar one. I mentioned that one. This here is written here. The process for enhancing individual freedom and the social commitment to help to bring it about those things, right? Three levels. So remember that one? It's not just the GDP per SE. In fact, the goal of a development. Remember that the trust actually evolve all the time. Right? Remember GDP per capita and, uh, and and to the entitlement And, uh, and, uh, to sustainable, uh, sustainable development and human freedom. So the goal is actually evolving. So only 70 years, you know, 70 years in the post post, uh, post war, period and, uh, so much lessons have been learned for economic development. But again, you can see the the the the evolutionary, the thought continue. That's why in the lecture one, perhaps also in a conclusion, we can see certain issues are being settled. But a lot of issue are unsettled. Those unsettled issue highlighting the new agenda which you, you know, younger generation of you know, scholars like you will be capable of doing that way. So So that's why I think it is another message. Very finally, last minutes is the message from the author of Textbook. And, uh, he said Professor SI have written this textbook on the economic development so that students can apply their knowledge of economic to the plight of a poor country in the hope that they will better understand the divided world in which we live and think about the issues of development topic in whatever capacity they may subsequently work. And, uh, I've been teaching the development economics for over 40 years. The first version of, uh, edition of the book published in 71 70 72 and I have encountered thousands of students in different parts of the world and from a different country like us, right? Very different countries, different background, many of whom have gone on to work in the development field as employees in international agency. Some of you maybe in the future, and the nongovernmental organisations concerned and with economic and social development or as a teacher, as I mentioned earlier today, right, You may become a teacher teaching similar subjects down the track and the researchers in poor countries. If a new generation of students studying development economics are inspired to do the same, this value will have achieved its purpose. So he passed away a few years ago, and, uh, we have a new edition of that one, the 10th edition. So I hope that yesterday I was a Roli sent me a message saying they got a a new book about development. Uh, I look at that one. It's very comprehensive. So you can see you publish it now. and, uh, he wants me, whether I have a, you know, inspection Copy. I said I'd like to have one, but they said no. You have to use this one as a textbook to be able to qualify that one. So I said no. But anyway, so this is the message from A from a professor. So he is very passionately about the teaching development economics. So if you some of you in future, pick up the subject, I hope you will do the same thing. And, uh, as the professor servo being demonstrated anyway, thank you so much. We finish the everything.

SPEAKER 2
So, uh, no group design in today. No tutorial this week. So, uh, perhaps you can have more time to, uh, to, uh to to write, to finish. Let me repeat.

SPEAKER 1
The, uh, the is due on the on Monday in the evening. And, uh, make sure you send right version. Correct version. I know you're doing several papers, right? Don't mix up, OK? Every year we have mixed up. And, uh So, uh, so, uh, make sure that, uh, So, uh, for those students who have finished polish in writing one of the skills to develop is to to go through. Not once, maybe twice. I lived for a while and then revisit again. And to amazingly, you can always find room to improve. All right, so this is a piece of work, which can, uh, in fact, after so many years now, I still have a student. You know, long ago, you know, being graduated saying that I like to do the PhD. Can you write me the recommendation? I said, send me the the essay you wrote for this course. I look at the game. Of course. The course. The scores is already illustrated, but I like to read it again. Some students. It's more than 10 years now, and, uh, I have a one from Indonesia and more than 10 years ago, You know, I said, send me the essay and the students send me the essay. So the essay is actually something of your own. So pay attention to that one. It's not just a fulfil the course work requirement. It's actually you piece of research, uh, is for those students who are just started doing that one. It's your piece of research. So keep that one as a as a record and, uh, so you will continue to do that as well. So, uh, I think, uh, another message is that, uh, the final exam, the final exam where university requires we do the the proctor. Previously, we don't use that one. We didn't use that one before. This is the very first time. So that's why 20 year prepare the, uh, the instruction and also a practise on water. So police do the practise otherwise. Otherwise, there's a lot of things you don't know. Then it came as a shock. And when you start open to do, the exam is not good. During the exam, you have to have a very, very calm, very clear mind. Somehow, you know, not tense in a way. But if you have the technical issue in front of you, how come you can have a very clear mind? You organise your thought in answering those questions? You can't. So do the practise. If you have a question, ask me or ask. I'm not very good at the technical side. But ask two year two year will be answer to that one. So So that's one. So three hour exam. And, uh, there's all the very clear instruction in in water. So go through that one, OK? And the one I will be there in the 1st 10 to 15 minutes at the exam, also online, as we call it, the reading time. And so, if you have any question and PTSA, I won't stay there for a whole whole the exam. But, uh, just a few few minutes and, uh and then there's a way of completing the exam paper going through. And, uh, we will send the sample questions to bottle today. After this, uh, seminar, you can look at the those format. But again, let me emphasise the question for each individual. So it will be different because this is it called of randomised. So the question is being randomised, so nobody knows. You know, each individual will have a whole which side of a question but again, three part right, so straightforward, most substantial. And then open ended the question. So the exercise of doing essay actually help you. The way of doing that will help you to answer those substantial questions. And, uh, anything from you. Oh, yeah. One more is about evaluation. You know, it's doing long time, so spend a few minutes. And, uh, I think evaluation is good for, uh, for us in a way to improve to address those, uh, you know, those area where we are liking. So, uh, so you know, just to do that one, It's on Boal Now. You can You can do that. What else? Anything from you may come on, you will cover all

SPEAKER 2
the topics. So the the so I just cover the whole and

SPEAKER 1
the Yeah. Good question. The final exam, The randomised question will cover all the the course content. But also, we like it because the, uh, no seminar is, uh we put a lot of effort in, you know, preparing for every weekly seminar. So similar questions also be being part of that one. Not not necessarily everyone, because, uh, but, uh, some key questions we emphasised will be included in the final exam. Thank you. Yes, it is. It's the open book exam. You can do everything, but, uh, but, uh, if you attend, you know you are here, right? I mentioned a few points in my final discussion about a similar topic is actually very much the way you answer. The question is very much the way you should answer that question, all right? And even though all the materials are available to you, that means that you don't have to memorise the scene. Right. But we want to test your thinking. You move the fuller understanding about the cost in a way to connect the theory right in applying that one in a particular way. For example, those kind of things is not just there. You check the lecture notes or even textbook can help you with that one. No, we can tell that very clearly. Can you connect up with those, uh, approach? All right. I will be here after we finish this session. So the questions and I don't know whether we should take another photo, because the first day the photo is brilliant in that room. It's just so many of them and with heavy face. But I can see the happy face and the smelling face today. So that means it's OK, right? Thank you so much. Any any question from online student? All right. Good luck with everything. And, uh, a and one of them.

SPEAKER 2
And you study? Yeah, the state of this party. Yeah. OK, now, Welcome. Welcome. Thanks. We see how we get to see you. Here we get so yes. Mhm. Oh, yes, My Yeah, OK, years later. Not all you want, but very regularly. Ok. Hello, Cells. After you shot. Yeah, the Yeah, I know. Why. What the So you understand for my, uh, OK, I Well, I know what right. All of a sudden I you know, despite this, all of this that No, all the the snails and, uh yeah, that's good. Yeah. So this I so I Thanks. Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. And I start on you get back. Yeah. You You that? Yeah. You. Thank you. Survive going to nice. I was I don't get so the dark. Thank you. So on, Right? Is it yours or I love this one, and I want to I should be professor. Professor, uh, if you want to book a consult with me, just send me an email. Right? I can organise an online construction with me with you. Do you? You do have my email address, I think. I think he you don't mind. OK, it's time for you and that. And it just no mean, um looking for objects that Hello? Because the I uh that close. You know it. You apply. Oh, I three Oh, no. What time of the submit they give it to or not from the same link link. So we want to get this link. Yeah. Yeah, I think that you do have some ideas. Yes, uh, from the bank. Yeah. They so OK, yeah. They can be a brother to Yeah. What? Do what get you some sort of a whole white MF one. Then you must thank you so much for will be back. And, uh, I hope you learn something. Really? We find that OK? Same with the separate links. One for the government links one for the education for the education. That OK? Yeah. OK, like the thank you. That is to first just, uh you have the practise. Yeah, on the last question of medicine, but OK, its called the application. I am somehow Yeah, how we discuss that, Uh, and also for the special favour give you some but with the amount of time. But this is our part of the people, OK? Oh, you can on water. Um, yeah. It's just like, uh, uh, white pan on the water page, OK? Yeah. Thank you so much. So in the sense of you need to go home, send me Send me off in the I don't Who knows what to do? Thank you so much. No, based on no. Oh ok, yeah, yeah, my insurance. Is that the skills? Oh, I see Comparison. You photos or go or you would like bloodshed. So this is it. I read your paper twice. So it's if you want to make everything together, it's quite important to to separate them into the with your So come back. I need some I and then I will have. And then the second one would be a fact. A different country. So the so as long as it's clear that OK,

SPEAKER 1
well always have a view at the beginning. So therefore reader can see your view from the very beginning. And then all the arguments follow right? That is what we call this the logical and coherence. If you don't have a view expressed at the beginning, we read a page and a page and tear it towards the end. The conclusion It's just too late. So online that at the beginning that would be useful.

SPEAKER 2
Yeah, blah, blah, blah. And then I will explain the factors below. OK?

SPEAKER 1
Yeah. OK, good. Good luck with Yeah, hold on a second.
