SPEAKER 0
this material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University in accordance with Section 113 P of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication maybe subject to copyright under the act any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice the importance of, uh, learning

SPEAKER 1
this one. So that's the general introduction. We do mention that, you know, measure in one of the slides in the in the lecture and I think also importantly, we can see that how saving are kind of a generated right and through financial means through a through a monetary means for example, setting the interest rate and, uh, but also the saving also determines by people's the so called inter temporal inter temporal choices. Basically, you know what you want to save now. Basically, you are considering about the consumption in future, right? That's why you put the money aside as a saving. So this kind of a decision will be determined by the real interest rate over time, so in the sense that we have to somehow linking, linking back to how the interest rates are being determined. Precisely on that point, we can see that the country's financial market is a lack of development in the sense of what it's just like other commodity market, right? If the if the price are distorted, the market are distorted, right? So therefore, in the financial market, what's the price? The price of a capital? The price of utilising capital is the interest rate, right? So therefore, if you have a financial repression, right in the sense or lack of a financial market development stating that the price is a real challenge, right, that the price can be distorted like a commodity market I just said a minute ago is the same thing. The distortion can happen in the capital or financial market, so that's why the liberalisation the reform is all being related right to liberalise. So in a sense, we mentioned about how to reform the integration of the capital market. But very importantly in many developing countries, the financial market are characterised by what and the so called financial fragmentation in the financial market. What do we mean? by financial fragmentation. Again, always remember, is the price. What is the price in financial market is the interest rate, right? So that means that the fragmentation means that we have a different kind of a market right formal versus an informal in particular, why the informal financial market are important because of a lack of a formal institution or lack of a form form of financial market development. There's a massive, you know, operation of the informal financial market. And a lot of you know, the borrowers especially, you know, those private business, right? They they are somehow being hampered in getting access to the formal sector, somehow being discriminated against. So those people are boring informally paying low or higher interest rate higher or lower lower is much, much higher. Why is that precisely because they are informal, so therefore they have to say a premium. But these people, the informal sector, can deliver the lendings very quickly very quickly, with uh, perhaps also not so much about the limitation about the total amount, but however, precisely because they are being informal. So those are lenders are pricing a very high price for that one. The private entrepreneurs because they can't get access to the form of financing. So they have to borrow with that one. Now imagine the same country. But with the financial fragmentation, a certain section of the society paying much higher borrowing costs right is good or not Good. Definitely not good Using the economic concept, which is the, uh, which is the, uh, the the opportunity cost, meaning that the economy as a whole, if we have an integrated financial market, basically all the borrowing are paying the same price. By doing so, the opportunity cost of nationwide will be much reduced. Efficiency will be very much enhanced, not to mention about. The flourishing of entrepreneurship will be very conducive to the economic development, innovation and other things. So in a sense, the financial market or lack of reform or the fragmentation somehow hampered the economic development. Not good, right? In a sense, because we know you know the integration will be the way. So that's why we define the financial repression in the way, uh, about government control, lack of, uh, you know, those kind of a regulation or commercial banks and et cetera. So you can see the, uh, the the way of overcoming those one is the is the way to go. Other things we identify in the lecture is about those kind of distortion distortion when government play in in allocating, you know, credit in a way so the supply and the demand will be distorted, right? There is a chance I won't go through them. But you can look at that one to see the investment and saving balances right? There is a kind of equilibrium point which equalise those supply and the demand in a way. But however, when you set the price right which being somehow being distorted and as a result, you can see you know, those kind of a behaviour of a borrowing and also the behaviour of a saver, those is also very much a dis. Now, also, let me ask you, what is the key? What is the key messages for the financial system reform? I already mentioned that, uh, very importantly, right is the price. The price in financial market is basically reflecting what? The interest rate right as the price of that one. So therefore searching some kind of a market driven, the determination of interest rate is the way to go. But however you know in reality, it is very difficult to have a purely market driven determination of interest rate. And, uh, but however, if the interest rate or the price of a financial asset are being distorted and what will happen to the market now, for example, when you have a real interest rate, uh, become a very low what is the impact on the savers? People will save less, right? So therefore the the reform of the financial liberalisation, the core part of that one is to set appropriate real interest rate and difficult in reality. But again, that's the direction for the for the reform. And in that context, we can see that financial liberalisation is the way to go right. And because when you liberalise the financial system and to the competition from outside outside work, you can see that, uh, very much, uh, again, you know, the integration take place not just within country, but also tap the resources, especially the the financial resources globally. But again, it's not easy right to do so. And in the lectures we mentioned specifically about the challenge for country to liberalise the financial market and of course. You know, country can liberalise the goods market trading goods relatively easily, right. And, you know, get rid of the tariffs and to encourage through policy and formation, you know, to trade. But when you come to the financial liber liberalisation, the things become a much more complex. So what are the complexities in terms of liberalising a country's financial market? That's precisely the McKinnon, right? Uh, he he he from I mentioned his name and the story of my personal encounter with him before I won't repeat here, but, uh, his book about the order and the sequencing of a financial liberalisation is basically the standard is the standard the, uh the, uh the policy advice or suggestion for the developing country in opening the financial market. In theory, financial opening is a is A is a very much designed but however in reality, you know, it can cause a tremendous, uh, financial stress or even the financial crisis. So basically, there are some preconditions. Those print conditions are very necessary in a way for the country to liberalise the financial market. By the way, the key measure for liberalising financial market is what is basically the capital account liberalisation, right? There's a two account in terms of the open economy. The first one is the current account, basically talking about the trade right, which is for many countries already open trade so relatively easy to handle the current account. But when you come to the financial side, which is the capital account liberalisation, why liberalising capital account kind of brings in the risk for the country involved? And, uh, that's precisely because of the the preconditions are very necessary. I hope you still remember those preconditions are what basic macroeconomic stability, price and employment and overall balance of payment more or less. But importantly is what if you have a very rather robust domestic banking system and if you don't have that one, you can see the sort of agility right getting involved. So those are negative shocks when you open the open the capital account, that means that basically, capital, especially the equity capital, can in and out rather freely, right? So then you have the policy maker authority in, you know, in that circumstances, they have to handle that capital flight right? And, uh, that's very much related. A country so called exchange rate. We'll talk about that one later on when we discuss the Asian financial crisis in lecture 11. And, uh but, uh, this is what happened, you know, to to many countries right, so vulnerable when they liberalise the capital account. We don't really have a very established domestic financial system. So by doing so, you can see that you know, the, uh, so vulnerable right Asian financial crisis. Even now, after the GFC or after covid, we can see that a lot of country now still suffering from those kind of external shocks because the capital accounts are being liberalised. So when when currency are depreciated resulting from a capital flight, what will happen? The depreciation of the currency, of course, can enhance the country's competitiveness. But it can also distort the motivations, you know, for the firm to involve in the economic activities and also pricing a country's asset, the holding, the value of a holding foreign asset all being changed. But also, depreciation also affects the capital for capital inflow. Right. So previously, these countries are perhaps, I think, this year, the real measure back to my previous point about the financial, not financial market reform. We are thinking about the real interest rate right in setting that one, I think, very importantly, to compare two things Number one is about a real return on investment and to compare the real return of investment with a real interest rate. So if the real return to investment are higher than the real interest rate interest rate, that means the return are higher than the borrowing cost of the You're borrowing the money, right? So by doing so, investment will become more and more people like to invest because you got a higher return and, uh, so so setting that the real interest rate is, uh, nowadays, perhaps if you pay attention to to current financial global financial situation, probably you will be keenly aware this is what happened a few months ago. Federal Reserve saying that, uh, wow, you know, inflation is coming down. So, uh, from, you know, more than 778 close to 8% now to 3.8%. So therefore, perhaps the Federal Reserve will be in a position to cutting interest rate at least three or four times this year. But last week what happened? Because inflation is rather strong, labour market is rather strong. So the federation says no, we're not probably not in the position to cut interest rate, but however the global financial market the investors already factor in already factor in that. You know, this is about expectation about the cutting interest rate, right? So therefore the investment and obviously the stock market booming. And but after this news and everything is coming down, but at the same time, because of they are setting, the signals are not cutting interest rate. So perhaps the interest rate differentials between us and the rest of the world it will be higher. So after that news, just a day after the Asian currencies, including the Chinese yen, the Japanese yen, I think Indonesia currency and India Vietnam, all the currencies are depreciating against US dollars, so dollar index increasing tremendously now. Why country worrying about that one is because it's as I just mentioned, if you have this kind of a currency fluctuations that affects investment, that affects the trading activities that affects the saving, all all the macroeconomic things will be effective. Anyway, we don't see the clear, uh, development yet and then Australia. Perhaps this today, uh, the RB, a also was in seeing that they probably they were put on hold previously even speculate that perhaps the Australian, uh uh, reserve, uh uh uh, bank were cut interest ahead of the federal, but no longer Because the labour market is very strong. Unemployment is a relative low, so therefore they probably are put on hold. Then you can see all the implication for that one. But anyway, this is, uh, a little bit, uh beyond the from the from the lecture. So after that, we can see the the order and the sequencing of liberalisation right? Make it is very difficult. Did I mention about the impossibility triangle in the early lecture? Probably later on. There's a impossibility of triangles in terms of the opening countries are capital account meaning what meaning at one end and basically triangle and independence of monetary policy and the fixed exchange rate and the free flow of capital. And this is three angle right. This is a triangle. So three objective cannot be achieved at the same time, so people have always have choices. I think that's the content we can pick up a bit later on. But be aware, you know, when you have an opening economy, especially the financial capital account opening making things are very difficult. Forcing country to choose, in most cases, the fixed exchange rate. Right. And then what happened when you defining the fixed exchange rate, You basically you basically you lose the, uh the independence of monetary policy. So your monetary policy will be controlled by some somewhere else. Maybe Federal Reserve, not your own. You know, Central Bank is because of those kind of choices, but that comes later. So here, you know, liberalisation order of that one, country perhaps will follow. Uh, those, uh uh those things. So if you go through the lecture, uh, listen to the lecture note, those are the the the key point, right? And, uh, another. Another element in the second half of the lecture is about, uh, let me jump a bit before I do the maybe. Let's follow the order. So if basically the physical means the physical means about the generated income, right generated revenues from a taxation system in a way to fill the development gap. When we introduce the higher DOMA model, we already mentioned that one right government can also borrow, but government can also secure their expenditures with, uh with their own revenues. So government revenue expenditure. This balance is very much related to what is very much. In theory, related a country's current account balances the current account balances. Basically due to trade right, you can see the trading, import and export, but also due to a country you know, country government revenue and expenditure. If a country's revenue is above the government expenditure, this country is running current account syphilis if the country's expenditure is larger than a government revenues and this country is running current deficit, right? The very good example to look at what happened to China and the United States. On the one hand, China has a very high well, if you look at the data in the lectures, I can't remember precisely. But we have a three group of countries right develop middle income and lower income, so saving ratio is varies across a different country. But many poor countries have a very low especially in terms of, you know, country groups, right, we can see sub Sahara. The saving ratio is very low and, uh, and not necessarily saving continue to grow right and with the income. It's not in a linear fashion, so in a sense you know, saving versus the investment and the government revenue versus expenditures. So China has excessive saving. And even though both saving ratio and the investment or expenditures are also very high and the United States is a typical example, the government is running in deficit right and extraordinary. Now, you know, in April the latest data to show that US a total debt has reached the $35 trillion and the data back to January this year is actually 34 so you can see three months, a trillion dollars have been increased. So this country are running current account deficit in a way that a deficit has to be filled. You cannot say that. Well, let's just leave it right. No, But fortunately for us, fortunately is what for the United States, because US dollar is a reserve currency, so therefore everywhere else, you know, international trading settlement is all you know depends on US dollar, a majority right, more than 40% in the trade settlement. And so, in a sense, it is still very much in demand so US can print the money, right? It can print money to fill those, uh, those differences. But again, in the long run, we know it. You have You have those kind of, uh, you can call it a structural problem. So down the track us dollar will be weakened in a way, and ah, but anyway, that's a separate issue. And so remember that when the government revenue and in the lectures, the discussion is really focused on how government can maximise the tax revenue, right? And for those students who are working in government, especially related to taxation things, right, so you can check the data to see the the the tax effort in your country. Compared with other countries, there's a statistic to show that to measure each country is a tax effort, right? If a country tax efforts is below and or compare with other countries, you can see you have a room to improve the you know, to reform the taxation of the system to be able to generate more income, right? And for many developing countries, you know, insufficient efforts are put in and again in the from the lectures. 70% of the income in the developed countries are subject to tax income tax, but only 30%. Only 30% of the income in developing countries are subject to to tax. It is just so, so low. On the other hand, government also have all have a you know, the objective of developing right expenditure, etcetera, so always creating the physical gap that gap being reflected. It's a very awkward financial physical position, by the way, when I talk about the precondition for liberalising our country's financial market capital account etcetera, I mentioned about the government control and anything. But one thing is about one precondition. Is the physical discipline more or less, the government have to be rather safe, right in terms of a balance sheet compared with the revenues and expenditures. So those kind of consideration is also very necessary. In a way, I think, the final lecture Sorry, final part of the lecture dealing with a very important issue that is the relationship between inflation and economic growth. Right? So, again, it's not a linear. And, uh, there's a few slices because inflation is so topical right now in discussing develop transition and, uh uh, economy, uh, post pandemic. So therefore, the inflation and the growth is a is a very much, uh, I think it is very interesting. So if you go through those slides, be aware about that relationship so you can see that there's a two charts at least the same. You know the same story, basically, that you know it's not a it's not a linear. When the inflation are become increasingly higher and higher you can, you can tend to generate high growth. But however, when inflation goes beyond, like a 5 10% or even more so you can see this actually negatively affecting it still positively. But, uh, and eventually it will be negatively affecting. So what happened to Argentina, for example, impose the pandemic right? So inflation is just shooting up to more than 100%. So when you can look at the chart to see that those high inflation will lead to the negative growth in a way, So for developing country, you know, maintaining those kind of a balance right is, uh is it will be crucially important. That's roughly the other summary about the lecture, but important it is to understand why and how financial liberalisation is necessary. And I think that perhaps also very importantly, to to be aware about the financial fragmentation, you know, market fragmentation and why the real interest rate determination is important in determining that. And, uh and, uh so that's roughly about a summary and any questions. Another thing I like to say that financing development, as I mentioned at the at the beginning of the day, is that, uh, you try to use the, uh you know, those, uh, the concept, the theory, the practise of policies we have learned so far. And then when you when you have those kind of, uh, you know, theory as a background, you can digest the lectures quite well. OK, it's not just independently talking about financial market and reform and liberalisation, and it it's all very much related. And later on. For example, when we talk about the balance of payments, constraint, growth, it's the same story. It's the same story when we're dealing with the price, you know, terms of trade and income, alys of demand for import and export. So the price alys of demand for import and export is the same thing. If the country is opening, then you're subject to all these kind of forces. It influence the way and under which the growth takes place. All right, but that is the, uh, less later. All right, So if there's no, uh, uh, questions, let's come to the seminars. I have chosen the the income inequality as a as a today's, uh, you know, the seminar or the case study. And, uh, we can discuss that one in the second hour and, uh, why, that is important. Why the income inequality when you mentioned about the lecture of the state versus the market in the way, we can always say that the market externality or the market imperfections or market failures one of the symptoms for that one income inequality can be one of them. When the countries have very high income inequality, I'll give you the data. Perhaps if you haven't looked at the data, perhaps the data will shock you see? Wow, is that worth We are actually living here. Can we do something about it? Right? You, You, You Naturally, you call for that one. But now the income inequality become such an important issue because through global financial crisis, through the covid crisis, we can see that income inequality is is just a shooting up both across country and within country. So we should again reflecting something wrong with the current. The operation of the market be it is a good market or financial or factor market. It's the same thing, right? So therefore, in the context of development is the same thing. Many developing country also facing a tremendous pressure in dealing with the income inequality not just the income inequality but also the so called the inequality in wealth. Global wealth is also so Today's topic. Let's go through a some of the data now global income income. So the question we ask, what are the facts on the rising income inequality? So presenting some effects, what are the fundamental causes for rising income inequality? So naturally we ask right if it is very high. So what are the causes? So what are the consequences of rising income inequality? What is the impact right? The consequences of that what will be the appropriate ways for addressing income inequality but very importantly is the final question. We always ask, in a way, Is there a trade off between equity and efficiency in the development context and this question is with the economic development all the time in equity and efficiency. So if you have a if there is a trade off, that means the policy priority in terms of growth and development or in terms of a policy addressing the social equity issue have to be maintained a certain balance. If there is no balance, you can see the efficiency can be achieved at the expense of equity or the social equity can be achieved, but at the expense of efficiency. And this is happening in develop it. Happening in developing is also happening in transition economy countries like Vietnam, China and it's also happening. So let's say the the data. So what are the facts? And we will give you the data about the world population, first growth and the regional distribution of world population in future growth of GDP per capita and the world population by income levels. Now this is the population. It's not nothing. I think everyone knows that one. You know, we have 8 billion people now, but importantly, this is the that kind of a P, or purple line. The growth rate of a population, the fertility rate is actually falling fairly quickly. Well, you know, the total population continue to grow. That's the situation we are facing right now, right? So this is a quite well known fact. But let's look at the global income and wealth inequality. The data is the 2021 and you can see that this is the income. The left panel the right one is the wealth and the red one. The red bar is a top 10% owing in the percentage of both global income and the global wealth is that extraordinary. 10% top 10. And the green bar is the middle 40% of the population. Owing the percentage of income Can you see the figure there? So I will repeat, OK. And the wealth and the blue one is the bottom 50% of the population. Owing the share of a global income and wealth is that extraordinary? 50% 8% income, A 1% only 2% of global wealth. That's the situation. But this is the overall picture. That's the overall picture. Basically, right now, you can see if you look at the data of 2023 that perhaps, uh, again extraordinary. You can see it's worsening the situation. Crisis added. You know, those, uh, the rich become richer and the poor become poorer. And, uh, that's the things that we kind of, uh, experiencing, uh, through this, uh, this time now, let's look at the the Bay Region and, uh, again, red is the top 10. The same thing, the blue bottom 50. Middle one is the 40. So you can see that the right one. For example, you know, even less developed country the, uh, the top 10 owing a much higher share than the rich country, right? Rich country, North America, for example. Something like less than the fifth. You know, 40 46 45. But, uh, sub Sahara Africa, you can see extraordinary 10% is owing about 50%. Well, you know, you will expect the rich property country in a way. So the less the poor country, the MEN A is the is the Middle East and North Africa. So a special category that has the highest, the inequalities, right, And, uh, also interesting to look at the, uh the bottom one. Right. The bottom one. The blue one is actually coming down, right? And the the green one is coming down a little bit, so that's highlighting different regions. You know, those income inequality, The poor is the half, you know, really lags behind the bottom, the bottom bottom of 50%. And, uh so that's another data to show you. And again, this one is about the concentration of capital and inequality across the world that the similar pattern but the 10% when they come to the the capital asset is extraordinary, right? You look at that one and Europe is a is a relative low, but North America is very high. But the same thing you know for not in America and all this. So that's for the capital concentration. Very extreme in a way. So any thought. But the inequality can be compared between the between country and within country, so you can see a very important change taking place in the 19 eighties. Well, you can see the inequality between countries are the share is increasing in the contribution to global inequality. Well, the countries are, you know, between country sorry inequality that the red one is the within within country inequality. Red one is increasing and the blue one is between country in equality. So that's the You have a total global inequality, so within countries actually increasing quite rapidly. That's perhaps due to what, due to the country have a very large size like China, right and embarking on economic reform, causing enormous the inequalities and a certain state. Right now it's easing a bit. But somehow the the inequality in China resulting from economic transformation making China as one of the most unequal society in the world being captured by the G coefficient is something like a 0.46 I think right now it's E a bit, but 0.46 is equivalent to a country like Brazil in Latin America and South Africa country. So again, you know when we talk about the trade off, we can come back to this kind of, uh so within the country, the inequality resulting from those domestic transformation emphasising the efficiency perhaps, as I mentioned, perhaps at the expense of equity, so therefore making the internal within country inequality much higher, higher. So in contributing the global inequality, meaning, of course, that's basically what you need to do is actually is a is a within country right major in uh, in dealing with that inequality. This one is a simple just by what population and by income, high income, upper middle income and lower income and lower and lower middle income. So you can see the the high income continue to continue steadily increasing. But upper middle income is also lower one and et cetera. So that's about the population by income. Now let's talk about what are the fundamental causes for rising income inequality. I already touched upon that one transition economy, right? And, uh, perhaps also some developing countries and, uh, during the same time undergoing those kind of, uh, some kind of a reform and the transformation. They can also lead those, uh, rising inequality that's within country between countries. Global inequality, which is, you know, the total one can be resulting from the so called the globalisation. So that's why you can see there's a strong backlash, right? Somehow against the globalisation. This is what we call this the de globalisation, right? And it happened since basically 2012 and before that one global trade, you know, act as an engine for economic global growth. But after that, when global trade is actually very much subdued. And for many years, growth of trade is actually below growth of GDP global GDP. So why is that? Because many countries have chosen to do some kind of a protectionist policy. United States, even European Union and, uh, somehow against the principle of free trade, the WTO the multilateralism. Even though at the same time there's a regional grouping taking place, right? R, CE PS and the TCP TPP those happening and North America and ASEAN versus you know, North Asia is also happening. But somehow, uh, those forces have become so strong in a way. So therefore, we do observe that the globalisation, the trend, it continues until basically now, now, perhaps for you to think about the future, right? And, uh, maybe you can answer the question. This is actually the topic in lecture 10 when we talk about the trade and by then you can see that the trade actually demonstrate or generate enormous gains for countries involved. And those skin can be demonstrated by either the sorry dynamic against all the static against right. But however, why country, somehow you know the backlash in terms of the globalisation. Why some countries especially, you know, in the United States. The policies are really very much American. First the policy basically saying that, you know, no matter what, you know the policy being adopted to protect their own job or industry at, uh at the expense of trade. So those things are happening because of what? Because the globalisation did actually generate the certain impact on the inequality when countries certain industries are losing right and closing down. Or you can call this a whole out of industry because of a global competition. And then you can see the politician somehow. The typical example is the trump election. You know, back to 2016, right? So people support him and because they feel they suffer from those kind of competition. And then there is a conceptual issue about the policy setting, whether those kind of a policy were actually yes, you know, leading to some kind of a dead end in the way, or whether they can offer hope again. That's the interplay between, uh, you know, the economics and the political or geopolitical thing. And, uh, but anyway, that's, uh, we can talk about in lecture 10 about that one. So globalisation, in a sense, Yeah, By the way, it's not all about, uh, globalisation. There's also study in North America showing that the loss of a job or the resulting from industrial structural adjustment is not very much depends on the competition from overseas. Another factor. Can you guess? Another factor is what let me tell you. Another factor is the new technology replacing job and new technology. The artificial intelligence, the industrial robot and et cetera firm want to increase their productivity so by, you know, employing all these the the machines right in the way that also cost the job. But anyway, now we have a facing the the competition from a I I was reading the other day. There's a report was saying, Perhaps is that a newspaper report or research report? Anyway, we see there's roughly about 40 to 60% of total employment in theory, can be replaced by a I 40 to 60. It depends on the country, the levels, And so that means the things we mentioned about about, uh, the job skills right in the 21st century. Remember, that one is actually very much so. So that means the future education will be challenged in a way and about, uh Anyway, those are kind of a separate technology and globalisation, but balancing that one, whether we should somehow steer, argue, or championing the globalisation or the integration. And, uh, my colleagues, uh, Y Xiao Zhou and I when we did that, uh, 2020 article on the, uh, the covid. So our the final part, we will see that 33, factors were influenced the way, uh, whether we can turn the crisis into opportunity, right? And, uh, number one is the, uh is the technology which is related to productivity? Number two is what number two is is the structural reform that's basically emphasising the supply side rather than on the consumption side. Supply side reform can actually enhance your country's potential growth rate through the productivity, etcetera, incentive, et cetera. The third factor is what is a global economic reintegration. But by the way, any student have read that article? No. OK, never mind. I was thinking that when you do the the exercise in writing assignment, that article will be useful for you. But anyway, so yeah, still was reading that one to give you a bit of a idea analysis is about the post pandemic. What sort of the word you know, we are going through and we have a follow up article and, uh uh on that one now income distribution and police. Isha question? Yes, it is. It might be a dumb question, but just when you were talking about Inequality earlier, um wouldn't like and technology wouldn't the catch up effect also reduce global inequality? Yeah, well, that's a good question. As already mentioned. Why? Why You have a global trade, right? Where Demonstrate, you know, they have the gains from trade. So efficiency and structural reform, adjustment, income, employment, urbanisation All these are very much related to the globalisation. But global should have some kind of a downside as well. So in balancing of previously, when we learn, you know, the free trade, we know that is the almost like a It's not a zero sum. The trade is a positive positive sum. That means that all gains, right? Yeah, that's a that's a That's very much so. But on the other hand, this is Let's talk about on the lecture tag when we talk about the trade because at that time we will review the stop of Samson theory. We also review the Samuelson his latest work again, not latest. You know, in the back to the nineties, he was, uh, basically the theorist, right, you know, to prove the he early model and, uh, in which the free trade were beneficial to everyone involved. But later on, he also admit, right, it's not probably is not the case. The free trade can have this kind of a distributional impact on between countries in equality between country, also within countries. Why is that one? Because a stopper summit theorem shows that it's not. Everyone gains from a free trade. Probably if you learn trade, you know that one. It is the most abundantly supplied factor. Production gains from free trade, the scarce resources, perhaps the owner of that one will suffer. So labour gains in case of China and India, you know, the Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, right capital gains from Europe and North America. That's a summer in theory. So therefore, in between, if the country have a good policy, public policy put in place to somehow smooth out those kind of transition, basically, you know, tax the rich tax, the people who gain from trade in supporting the poor or people who are negatively being affected. But however we know the public policy is very much lacking, very much lacking in doing so. So therefore, politician can mobilise right saying that No, let's blame trade. That was wrong. You don't blame trade now the debate Probably you can see that the government in Australia but many other parts of the world was seeing that made in Australia. This is a new strategy, new policy agenda. But why economies and very much against those kind of a strategy is what is basically the trade principles. We discussed that one in le 10. OK, good question. Thanks ya. Now the factors such as the automation we mentioned already technological changes and market frictions and have contributed to the rise of inequality. More than growth in international trade has. So again, you can debate that one. This is also based on empirical research showing that the technology is another factor. So therefore, the attention perhaps, uh right now is actually many countries European Union in particular, North America, China to have some kind of a some kind of a policy and regulation agenda in dealing with the a I And again, there's a lot about implication about inequality. Now. What are the consequences of a die equity consideration? Basically, human development is one of that right. Did we mention about our sense, the theory of our capabilities, human freedom as a objective for economic development, not so much as to support the contribution to production? It's a human. It is a when those kind of a concept being set or reset in understanding the goal or purpose of development. We see that the humans should be given the priorities right in in positioning of economic development, human development but without equity, equitable development, not talking about the nature and climate change, but just the human themselves. If the pattern of growth, all the industrialization, all the structural changes, taking place very much at the expense of a human being, you answer that question. Is that worth well or not worth? Well, perhaps, if it is a short term, you can see well, those kind of we have to balance off. So that pattern of growth can lead eventually, you know, to so called the trickling down right. The rich already get rich, but the poor also getting better So then the society can progressing. Well, that is one of the very strong argument to say that uh, yeah, we cannot reach for everyone at the same time. So why not just a light through market incentive, like a certain section of the society to get rich first, and that is trickling down. But the data I showed you just now is not right. It didn't happen. And perhaps a little bit of trickling down, but not much at all. Otherwise, we don't have the picture as I show you the chart to show that the global do the scale and the extent of inequality, we don't. So that means something wrong. Then let me talk about the human development like the human being so equitable. Development is one of the precondition. If not, you know, the game. People only in a small section of the people gain very much and continuously, but majority of them suffer and the income become a stagnant in a way. So that's equity consideration, the social dimension. People are not happy if ordinary people look at the charts. No, they are not happy. So that's why the populist populist view is just emerging everywhere people recognise No, you know, we we should try to protect our own interests in a way. So the demonstration against the globalisation taking police back to the 19 nineties. So at that time, I was a still doing my PhD. So I was a bit puzzled because you can see the gain from free trade, right? But why? People everywhere when the World Trade Organisation are holding a place for meeting or the global meeting of a World Bank IMF and etcetera? So the demonstrators are just follow that way tremendously. I was actually puzzling. Why is that? If globalisation deliver some gains, you know from trade why people are against that later on, you realise that it's the inequality issue. It is not equal right, the gains, the distribution of the gains and are not equal both between countries. So that's why us is against the China, but also within country. So you can see the It's so difficult to carry out the kind of a social reform and and anyway, so the social stability can be an issue. The macroeconomic perspective. We can see that the investment, consumption and saving so the household borrowing is extraordinary when you have the very 50% at the bottom of have a such a kind of a low share of both income and wealth. And, uh, but you also have this the capitalist machinery, right to produce the goods. So how come they can buy it? So therefore, the consumer, the the loans right, the debt are increasing. So firms the corporate debt also increasing the government debt is also increasing. We talk about that one already right globally. The debt level globally is more than 300% of global GDP. That's the dead. So macro economic perspective is also if it is a more equitable development resulting from a more equal distribution of income and wealth. Perhaps you can see the consumption right? Saving and saving probably is A is a different issue, but consumption and investment can be can be can be on the rise and the global division. As I mentioned, we talk about that one again. Lecture 10 perhaps Also lecture 11 lecture 11. Focus on more after we discuss the balance of payments issue and we discussed the Asian financial crisis OK, and what lessons we learned from that one. So now what we What will be the appropriate ways of addressing income inequality Now the puzzle Is that the trade off? Right? I already mentioned. And so the role of a market versus the means by government in rectifying income inequality, taxation policy. Right. And this is very high on agenda for European Union now in the past few years, but being delayed because of the covid crisis and, uh, so public policy, income transfer and the social safety net. So all these things is related to the social and public policy and you addressing that one. But market, remember, market is not a self legitimising right. It's not a self stabilising. And it's not a self for creating, but importantly, market competition itself. And is it not being capable in theory, in addressing income inequality or distribution of income? Right, So therefore, that has to be. The job has to be done by the government, in a way, so, uh, but taxation policy, but again related to the lecture Now, the taxation, the tax revenue, the capability of government to tax, you know, increasing tax being constrained by many manufacturers. Right? So the tax system reform, uh, need to be there, but importantly of a developing country to increase the so called the tax effort. The text effort for those students who listen to the lecture recorded lecture, probably. You know that story? I always thinking that is a interesting story. So the letter from, uh, English textbook about, uh, about, uh, there's on the street in London and the people are competing of, uh, squeezing the lemon, the need the the juice from the lemon and, uh, and, uh, towards the end, almost like old dry the lemon. And nobody can do a bit more to squeeze out the juice. And then as a gentleman came, he said, Let me just give a try. And he squeezed it and the juice dropped, dropped. Everyone was so surprised. So who are you? He said, I'm the tax collector. Anyway, I thought, it's a funny story. So that means you have to to be harsh, right? In a way to maximise the effort, you know, to squeeze the lemon bit hard. And, uh, but again, you know, there's also the, uh, there's also downside if you use your price, you know, too harsh too harshly because the, uh, that's a related the incentive, the business incentive and the ordinary people's incentive. If the income taxes are are very high and right now in Australia, you know the income very progressive tax, right? And, uh, government just have just reform the tax system in the way to actually lower the top end the margin and all increasing the total income to be able to qualify to subject to very high tax. This has already happened from July 1st, that tax system, this new policy, Why is that to lower the tax right? But people will say, Well, you lower tax, you lower the tax revenues, right in a way. But there's also the incentive effect for people to work harder when you have a But if you have a very high high tax for 47% out of your total income at a higher uh uh, R. So people you know they don't have a very incentive to work harder. And, uh, so that affects the, you know, economic growth and how to reap the benefit from globalisation while overcoming the negative impact of globalisation income distribution. That's the issue. I myself is also very much interested in this issue. That's Basically, the global division is almost like the way to go. And we we saw so much examples in history when the de globalisation taking place and how the consequences are including, you know, the Great Depression, including perhaps also the first World War and the Second World War in the economic sense is also resulting from those rising protection in the way. And, uh and, uh, but country have all these policies you know to treat basically give their own priority, but at the expense of others. The only theory which we talk about in electric 10, is about, uh, the mercantilist view, which is actually last in the global economy about 300 years. So at that time, you know, every country was saying that, you know, the gains from trade is to collect the, uh, the the surplus because the surplus will be paid in the form of metals, gold, silver and other things. So but if every country doing the same thing, you know how come you can benefit the trade, the overthrow of protection, it's not. So. The US is now criticising China as a mealy, you know, surplus surplus and to collect the you know the the reserves in more than $3 trillion reserve on part of China sitting there and, uh, but anyway, that's another issue and about whether we can actually change and finding a way. So I think the most popular practise right now is about about what is about the regional economic integration and so whether that can deliver right as a kind of a building block for the future, globalisation is a way to be seen and and how to manage the technology divide across a different country. And we touch upon that one already and in the previous lecture on the productivity and so you can review that one. This is a real agenda about the phasing technology. Now, for example, if a high share of labour force are being replaced by machine, right and a I later on and the unemployment will be rising. And of course, you know other things being equal. You can see those development were widening the income distribution right and again. So the way of finding that one, perhaps, is the through the public policy here, the taxation policy taxing home taxing machine taxing a I because they can offer a very high produce a very high productivity so high enough to have enough revenue for government to through public policy, you know, to support the people who are being affected. On the other hand, we have a strong motivation to change the education system, the things we offer in the classroom and for students to be able to watch to confront those challenges. And in competing, it is a very, very different environment in a way to benefit. And, uh, so those are the the messages I think is actually happening so quickly. So therefore, you can't wait. You You have to make a rather adaptive of yourself to those, uh, environment. Now, this is the, uh, skip those things about the growth of, uh, uh, annual wealth growth rate. Right? And, uh, you can see the richest and, uh, for those one. So that's the number of global millionaires and the billionaires again. You can see the the air, and, uh, but you can also see that, uh, the tax rate is also, uh, uh, there to see, but that can be very much improved, right? Basically the increasing mode tax for the corporate tax and, uh, you know, the, uh, many years ago. We have a scholar who came from Europe and showing a chart on the black board. I think using the, uh, using a Google as an example One very big company just drawing the chart operation from a different part of the world eventually and come to a particular country, then they have no corporate tax. So those big company have all these the global, you know, strategies of allocating and reallocating our business in order to minimise, minimise the tax. They pay a lot of rich people doing the same thing. So there's a lot of loopholes in the tax system domestically and globally or internationally. So now I think that the post pandemic facing the rising inequality facing the rising global debt level, I think this kind of reform is almost like inevitable to strengthen. We don't have a global government, so therefore very difficult to do so you know, tax globally but domestic, you know, setting, you know, tax has to be the system have to reform and and the revenue has to be collected in a way to address those very pressing social and equity issues we are facing. Now they are. This is exactly what happened. Public social spending as a share of GDP. This is a rich country case, as you can see from the in the post war period is always increasing. That's why in the majority of the post war period, we can see that it's very much a stable. The Stabilities are there in rich country, even though the competition right is always there. But somehow the social spending is also match, especially in European Union, and match with that one. But late in the recent years, you can see there is up and down, but stabilised a bit, perhaps down the track for the new phase of development. If there is any hope, we can see that one should be steadily increasing. Even with that one, you can see the inequality in income and wealth is is there right? So But this is very much necessary. But on the other hand, people actually raise a very big concern. The Scandinavia countries, right, Finland, Sweden, Norway and Denmark. And, uh, it's such an effluent society have so well established the social welfare system, it is so stable. And, uh, but now people start questioning about the physical sustainability in supporting those system as well. So anyway, so perhaps the balancing of you know very much we need to do a lot in doing that one, especially for I think, after this is the the things we are addressing that issue after the pandemic. Right? So everyone was saying that now the health right? Human, human health, human development themselves is really a concern. After a big crisis, a crisis happened in the centuries, right? And so again, that's the key lesson. So countries try to build those kind of health and welfare system and, uh, in the in the aftermath of that big crisis. But again, the physical sustainability is a real issue again. And, uh, physical discipline is another consideration. So again, interlace between economic and political scene. Now, finally, is the meeting the challenge of 21st century? So what are the messages so addressing? The challenge of the 21st century is not feasible without a significant redistribution of income and wealth inequality. You know it. Now, you see, you saw the the charts right to see to to the extent of inequality. So without addressing that one No, sorry. The challenges probably will be difficult to address. Look at the world around us, the rising geopolitical tension and, uh, and all these issues right involved. So the rise of a modern welfare state in the 20th century, which was associated with a tremendous progress in health, education and opportunities for all, was linked to the rise of a steep progress of a taxation rate. Without tax, without revenue, those kind of a job cannot be done. This played a critical role in order to ensure the social and the political acceptability of increased taxation and the socialisation of wealth. That means for people and the firm to accept the higher tax. That's the way to go, right? Progressive right is linked to the old social objectives and because the market is not automatically deliver. Remember, when we talk about the, you know in sorry, the externalities, right? There's a positive and a negative if the positive come to the education, perhaps health and etcetera. Right. So, uh, the the the private supplier of that one will be tremendously insufficient in meeting that gap. So government were in a position to do that. So the recognising those in need is very important to persuade people, especially the rich people you know, to donate, for example, right to do the right thing about their income and their wealth. And it's so many doing that is not doing that one. This is the so called the, uh, the, uh if you look at the the article we published last year, you know, on the modern entrepreneurship. So towards the end, we added that one. This is the ethical dimension or or corporate ethical and dimension of that one. That means that yes, you are a private company. Profit driven is the must right. But on the other hand, whether we should answer the question under against the oldest background, the corporate should have some responsibility, the social responsibility for doing that. One. If you agree with that one, the you know the consciousness that's that's kind of agreement it can be, can be reached in a way, right? So that's the one so rather critical. The socialisation of wealth. Wow, wealth is owned by private right, But can we have a certain way of It's just so enormous so they can't use it, their family for generations, but they can't use it. So that's why because US have a you know, those heritage attack. So a lot of, uh, rich people move their wealth over offshore to those, uh, tax haven at the island in Latin America and etcetera. But it's also the big entrepreneurs, you know, You can name it at the fort, right? Rock failure, right? They they basically put aside setting on the foundation, right, doing precisely of that one, you know, and, uh, you know, the fold foundation, right? And so many generation of young people myself included, you know, benefit from receiving those kind of scholarship from those foundations, right? It's the same thing. Perhaps also through policy reform, they can do much more on that one. So a similar evolution will be necessary in order to address the challenge of the 21st century. So recent development in international taxation show that the progress towards a fair economic policy is indeed possible at a global level, as well as within company countries. So globally EU pushing for that corporate tax right? And also, uh, G7 or G 20. Also advocating the the the the minimal, uh, the tax for the receiver FD. That means the country cannot compete by lowering the tax rate in order to attract more foreign investment. You can't. So minimum is a 15%. You cannot go below that one. Wow. You can see those is happening. Those kind of things is happening. So that's reflecting. The changes are just a highlight. And this one is, Remember, 21st century, we have only 11 quarter, right? No. So, uh, 2024 right? There's so many decades ahead of us and but so much, you know, challenges also ahead of us. So therefore, you know, from a developing, uh, point of view and highlighting those issues and what at the stake. And, uh so But the policy measures being adopted, yeah, addressing that one become very important. And so the drivers of inequality vary widely among countries with some common drivers being the skilled premium associated with the technical change and globalisation weakening protection for labour and lack of financial inclusion in development country. Remember in lecture the similar one, the similar one. Do you still remember the topic I gave you? Not this room. We are in the western. Many of you all came Excellent. We are talking about in the post pandemic world. What sort of a development strategy, Right. I think that was being recorded, right? Lecture one. So listen to that one. And the strategy, when very importantly, very important elements to the new strategy in the post war sorry post pandemic era is what is the inclusiveness? I don't know whether you remember or not, but I just reminded you that one. This is precisely about that one. But of course, the financial inclusion is the same is a part of that one. And the inclusive institution is also resulting From what, as AM and Robinson mentioned, why nation fail right is about the institution. So that means that in meeting those challenges, not just the policy per SE or public policy per SE is actually took the task of building appropriate institution. That institution, politically and economically, are inclusive rather than extract it. So that's something we can echo to what we have, uh, uh, covered before. So when the rich get richer, benefits do not trickle down. This suggests that the policy needs to be a country specific, but should focus on raising the income share of the poor and ensuring there is no hauling out of the middle class. This is all happening now. It's a holding of the middle class. Middle class is the base is being weakened previously seems to be very important in the development context. Remember, when you have a larger middle class, they can be important driving forces for big changes. Social, economic, political institution, right. But in developed countries right now, the middle class base is being weakened. The white collar workers also being affected through those competition and et cetera. So holding out and because of the, you know, Internet and the technology so to tackle inequality, financial inclusion is imperative in emerging and developing countries well in advance, economy policy should focus on raising human capital and the skill the same thing for for developing countries as well, making tax system more progressive. You know that's the way to go for developing and transition. If there's too much progressive you will, you will do it. A cost efficiency equity can be can be there, and but efficient can be compromised. So that's the, uh, the policy choices P. Public policy should protect and compensate workers whose earnings are adversely affected by globalisation. Otherwise, people won't support global reintegration they won't support it. So they drags down your policy. Uh uh uh uh. Formation. Why? Globalisation social policy should be treated as a complement rather than substitute. This is actually can be part of the the, uh, topic we discuss shortly. Is there a trade off between IRC policy seeking to reduce income inequality and those trying to stimulate growth? And I think about that one. It is all very relevant for development, less development. So the question I posed is that what have we learned from history about the nature and the pattern of income inequality we talk about between country. We also talk about within country, right. But most specifically, we can see capital labour inequality. That means that all of the national income the capital share in total national income is increasing in all countries, except maybe a few countries but a majority. So that means that labor's share is actually shrinking. That's inequality capital, labour, inequality of labour income. Again. You know, that's a big comp more complicated and talking about, uh uh the, uh, matching the, uh for example, the human capital with the with the payment. And, uh, but again, you know, the uh, the competition resulting from, uh, uh, certain things happening then even more educated, but you won't be able to actually get appropriate and, uh, the payment for that one. And because of the structural changes instruments for redistribution, the government policy can be part of that one. Now, the kni curve I use the pic is very little volume about the theory or sorry, economic inequality, very small volume. But it's a very useful reading he was seeing in that book. The cuisine is curve, you know, up and down, right? Income it up, peaked and down. It's not the end of history. It's not the end of history, but the product of the specific and reversible historical process. Why? Because inequality rising again is rising again. So he was very right. It's not end of history, because in Ukraine, in the United States, for example, very rich but inequality rising again. So, so much of challenge I had. So I leave the question here so we can took too much time. But we still have about 20 minutes to discuss before we come back to present any question. All right, so, uh, uh, the, uh, let's divide it right. So a group up there, a group down there, a group in the group and all my students, the former

SPEAKER 0
Hi. Uh, there's 14 students left. Maybe I will pause the recording for my students. I will send you to a breakout room. You will probably have 15 to 20 minutes for discussion. The seminar questions. All right. You may take a photo for these questions and then I will send you to the break our room. I just opened up uh, breakout room. Please join for free. Yeah. OK, uh, this fashion focus on the, uh the seminar questions today Question, but so yeah, So, house. Oh, God. OK, OK, I oh, immunity of living I right, Right. For some years. OK, those are Western, right? Yeah. So sorry. That station, but here station Oh, really? Mhm. Mhm. I get OK. Um we will Yeah, any Can they when? That much 10 to be the and from OK, I sure being in the Yeah, so right when the waiters Ok, OK. I see. We continue to have it. So was yes. I see John, he have seen there was there was this So she has some. Yeah, right at as a team. What happened? Should be I Really? Yes. Um, yeah. See you. Foundation the biggest 2008. You should in the budget, they would have I for show I was in Maybe just up with your channel. O, That is Yeah. Oh, OK. I would That works. No. Yeah, to be OK, my and be normal trust and your, um Ok, uh, let's give, uh, the online group

SPEAKER 1
a priority to to for them to speak first. So let call them back. Yeah, please. Yeah. We should have promise.

SPEAKER 0
Resume recording. They haven't back yet. Not not yet. Well, then is divided back to right. So it take one minute for them to back to

SPEAKER 1
it. So in that case, maybe we can Is it being recorded now it's being recorded.

SPEAKER 0
Yes. OK, yeah.

SPEAKER 1
So let the mhm your group first it is.

SPEAKER 3
Um, So, um, what have we learned? I guess our response to the question that obviously from the the and, um obviously from the, uh, patent, uh, explained by history with regards to capital labour inequality, that there is a gap between the capital and the actual number of of labour that we have. And so, um, on the labour income, we're also noticing that this is not uniform the distributions of income. Mainly because of this. They're influenced by lack of educations or skill levels, or there's discrimination in it. Um, and we were talking about the instruments for distribution. Um, with regards to addressing income, um, inequality, Um, such as how, In some countries, we apply progressive taxation in China or in Cambodia or Tonga. Um, social welfare. Um, and also, the another point brought up was the use of, uh, introductions of the digital taxation, um, to collect revenue. And however, in this discussion, the developing countries still very behind because we cannot match that. We're still, you know, the capital and labour has not yet been trained to to face that. Um and so looking at that pattern for Cnet curve is that at the beginning, we noticed the increase. But once we have a a policy intervention, then it should sort of lower it. But again, if continued social changes, this will increase one more, you know, once more. And so therefore, for the developing countries, we're always feeling behind trying to catch up in balancing this issue.

SPEAKER 0
That's well, yes, actually, we also discussed about the like,

SPEAKER 2
the contrary between economic growth and income inequality. Like we tend to see when the economic growth is stronger. So the income inequality will be higher because, uh, because we believe that when, uh, normally when there is the higher income inequality, the government will intervene by imposing, like, taxation policy or social welfare policy. So from the economic framework analysis, when we impose taxation, there will be the debt weight loss in mean There will be no economic activity because of this taxation. So this will degrade the economic growth. And we will. What we get back is the the lower income inequality

SPEAKER 0
Positive.

SPEAKER 1
Oh, OK. Yeah.

SPEAKER 0
So, anyone from this group uh, yes, please.

SPEAKER 4
We have a few opinions, and I don't think I have captured every all of them. So maybe we can Everyone can talk about it. Um, but we talked about that. There's a it's not mentioned in the slides, but in pty book, I think he talked about how increasing in income inequality, especially in the US, is not just a result of the divergence between the 10% and the bottom 90% but the concentration of wealth into the top 1% and the remaining 99% as well. So, um, one of the reason for increasing inequality is definitely the concentration of wealth into a much smaller group. And we agree that there's a trade off between growth and inequality or equity and efficiency. Um, we use the example of South Korea when it was first developing. Um, So, um, use the example of South Korea's crony capitalism, Um, as a as an example of demonstrating that sometimes the government do priority ties is efficiency rather than, um, equity. And even until today, they still have the the richest, the richest families or the Colmes in South Korea are still considered above the law. Um, a few years ago, the president of Samsung was arrested, but he was pardoned by the president against because of that consideration for efficiency over equity. Um, but yeah, we have the afternoon.

SPEAKER 0
Oh, no, you you had a good point about the

SPEAKER 5
and we also had a little discussion about, you know, redistribution and how, like it's not a new phenomenon. It it's always occurred, but I guess the the way it occurs now has changed, and or you may have previously received food or lodgings. Now you might receive money or healthcare. But then healthcare also continues to kind of change in what that looks like. And and it becomes more complicated, Um, and that you can also, I guess, sometimes see that like redistribution needs to occur more in, um, like, localised areas, right? It's not that it's not. Even so, there's still that inequity across across, um, societies. And and we had a good little chat about, um, maternity leave and, um, across countries and how that can really impact, I guess your, um eventually the, uh yeah, labour income for across genders.

SPEAKER 1
Very good.

SPEAKER 0
Thanks for that.

SPEAKER 6
Anyway, Yeah, I've just come up with the idea that, um the the distribution don't have to be monetary. I guess So. It it's like we mentioned about in financial like in last in this week's lecture that we mentioned about the non monetized system, which I guess like, um the the annual leave or the mature leave or something like that. But, um, yeah, it it seems like, uh, social redistribution that collective the tax from the rich people and redistributed, say building up the public facilities to support those low income and those kind of people in poverty, which is just like to, um, naturally or sub subconsciously to to to feed the gap. No, I mean to to fill the gap between the rich and the poor due to the tax. And I mean red distribution can be implemented more or less on those kind of public goods or public sectors. Uh, which in a non monetized way? I guess so. So And, uh, from this group?

SPEAKER 7
Yes. Yeah. So we also talk about that The nature of the inequality is coming from the gender nature of sharing income. I mean, the there is a Nobel Prize winner. I think last year's the Claudia Gordon that said that the income pay gap is still exist because of the gender shared of women. And I think it's very important for us to see that because it is very persistent issues now. And I think we should just take, uh, concern about that there. OK? Yeah.

SPEAKER 0
So you know?

SPEAKER 8
Yeah. So I think when we think about inequality, we think about first developing countries and how, in the beginning of their development stage. There tends to be, I suppose, less of a growth and efficiency trade off because you're not at the frontier yet you can actually have both growth and inequality even though your policies don't try to address inequality per SE. But growth strategies tend to be because you like to think a rising tide lifts all boats, right? So I think that you're still at that development stage. Um, one thing that we think about one thing why there is this capital labour inequality is just It is really just the case that capital is just a lot more productive compared to labour. So capital shares, especially in developing countries, tend to be much higher. Returns to capital tends to be much higher compared to returns to labour. You see labour income shares much lower, but this is in contrast to developed countries. Related to this as well is when we think about inequality between countries. There's been a lot of countries developing countries trying to promote FDI. And so when they promote FDI, yes, it brings jobs. But a lot of the times how you promote FDI is by not taxing foreign companies at all. So yeah, so I think that that also kind of skews the labour income shares as well. And I guess we do. Um we were also then discussing that. Perhaps then, you know, you can't just think about, uh, in the beginning.
