SPEAKER 0
this material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University in accordance with Section 113 P of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication maybe subject to copyright under the act any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice or the push the push

SPEAKER 1
by the government in setting up the market. Right and the self. The market is not a self regulating market. Forces were function in the way, of course, you know through prices in allocating the resources. But however, market is not a self regulating. We cannot just regulate through market through market means about their activity. Right. So you need a state in setting up the regulatory frameworks, right, so market will function in an orderly fashion. Otherwise, it will be very chaotic if you don't regulate the market. So it's not a self regulating the government need to step in right in setting up the, uh, those kind of, uh, institution. In a way to regulate the market. Self is not a self stabilising. What do we mean? Market functions, of course, is going traces back to before the Great Depression of 1929 and 33. So before that one, there's a theory, right? I mentioned that one, probably in that one. That means the according to science, the law, you know you demand Sorry. The supply basically automatically created demand. So therefore there's a more or less is the balance in terms of the market. But we know in the Great Depression, you know, there's so much of supply couldn't be, you know that mad. So we lack of effective demand. So in a way, it's not a stable, So market function is not in a stable fashion, you not a self stabilising. So what do you need? You need a central bank, right? You need a minister of finance in a in a smooth out when you have an economic going through the cyclical change. So again, those institutions are economic institutions are very necessary in a way, when you have a crisis, or when you have an imbalance between supply and the demand and as we see so often, right and not only in developing country. But in many developed countries, in fact, as we observed right now, you know. So all this a crisis we see you know, those the things and the market is not a self legitimise it. Why is that? Because we know that certain things, right? Legitimising you know why we need, for example, the, uh what have you to very much asymmetrical information in the market? Why we have this, uh, setup of insurance, for example, right. Why? We need, uh, some kind of a social institution. The support, uh, to support, you know, the operation of the market. So therefore, you can see Yeah, you know, again, institution, uh, play a very important role. This is just a one example I want to draw your attention to. And, uh, this is the things what we learn from a standard text book getting the price right against whole exercise or the practise of a developing country or in developed country as well. We need those kind of institution, or you can call it the market compatible institution. Why market compatible, then you can refer to the, uh, the, uh the the lecture notes about, uh, about those, uh, functions of a about those institution. And, uh, you know why nation fail about, uh, those kind of a political and economic institution. So I think that is, uh, uh, quite important. Uh, me message and, uh uh, in in the discussion, I think probably also very useful. Uh, by the way, how many people have listened to the recorded lecture? Quite few. Right. OK, very good. Thank you very much for doing that. And, uh, when you have this set up, you can see the, uh, very different from what we have learned from the standard economics, right? The standard of mainstream economic. You know, we don't bother. And as I mentioned, the, uh, probably touch upon that in lecture, Why? Why we don't bother about institution because of those theory are enough in a way to develop those abstract model right or the world in which we have so many very stringent assumptions. Right? Everything is a perfect, perfect technology. Perfect taste, perfect information, and, uh, and even the people, right. And we have an assumption about the rationality, right. And, uh, those rationality means that basically, you expect the people to act in a rational way, right? So Therefore, it makes a lot easier. And in theorising those are standard theory, right, because the people were acting in that particular way. But in reality, we know, you know, people are not in a way in acting as a kind of a rational human being. That's why you know the behaviour economics become so popular. So if that is the case, you know, market as we understood from the textbook, somehow we know there's a there's a distance right between reality and the theory. So learning the role in the role of institution economic is a basically help us right to bridge that gap. So that's why even though we have only one lecture only two hours and as I said earlier is a semester long, Uh, course and, uh, but is it so important, but also especially important in the development of context? Because the developing country that that's the, uh, I give you one, to, yeah. The Third World countries are poor because the institutional constraint define a set of a payoff to political and economic activity that do not encourage productive activity. Resources are scarce, right? So if you don't have AAA mechanism, which somehow allowed, you know, the resources being fully, more fully utilised. It's a pity, right resources in particularly for developing countries. But if we don't have a good system, that institution defined by the formal versus the informal, as well as the enforcement that that's a mechanism right to enable people. Basically, when you set up the rules of the game, people's behaviour will be constrained right in a way. But by doing so, one thing we have improved improved what? According to lecture, we improve the predictability, right? It, especially since it become a predictable right by many player in the market. So therefore, you can actually make a decision much easier, right, compared with the situation that actually they are not predictable. How come you can make a decision right relatively easier or straightforward? Because you can't because the things are unpredictable, so market or institution. So when you set up the rules, that seems to become much more predictable. So therefore, when everyone you know consumers as well as, uh, you know, the producers acting in a particular way, we know that is something will happen. So therefore you make your own decision and, uh, rather relatively easily, right? So you do try to reduce the uncertainties by doing so once we have this kind of a setting, you know, the economy can you know those are productive, economy can can flourish. So that's a basically, but institutions are not perfect. We know it so over time, especially for developing country set of a payoff, which is why so Another way of, uh, you know, to, uh, understand this, Uh, this thing is that, uh, institution embodied the so called the incentive structure. Every kind of institution. There's an incentive structure being embodied that Ince incentive structure will pay off where, where influence the people's behaviour, right. And a better institution. A better incentive structure will be a conducive right for the resources to pe to put into a more productive use rather than unproductive use or even destructive use. Right. And it all depends on what sort of institution you have. And for those students who are really interested, I can We have just published an article last year end of last year talking about the modern entrepreneurship, right? It's the same thing Whether the entrepreneurs were utilising, you know, their ability to mobilise the resources and, uh, put those of, you know, the factual production. The humans, uh, you know, the workers engineers into productive use or unproductive use, or even destructive use. It all happened in the society. So when is become a very destructive destructive is not good for the economy. Right? So only thing that entrepreneurs put their efforts into a more productive use. We know the the society the economy can flourish. But, uh, again, you can trace this back. That means it always depends on institution what sort of institution you have. And, uh, so this I think there's another statement. Yeah, the, uh, the third in the third World, because the absence of security property rights discourage investment and specialisation. Same thing, right, Because you don't have a right institution, and that's embodied the right incentive. So therefore, you know, you won't expect those kind of, uh uh uh uh uh productive activities to take place. The, uh the enforcement of contract and etcetera. Right. So this is all the things it is about. The one institutional matter, the predictability and the constraints on people. And but also there's a structural incentive. But importantly is also about a historical change before you do institution. You're always thinking about, uh, economics. Just economics, right? It's happening at a particularly time, a point in time. That's it. But when you look at the institution, you see, wow, there is another angle right in looking at what's actually going on in the society. So those institutional change shape the way that society evolve through time, because what we don't have much time to discuss that one. This is a related I mentioned in the lecture notes. It's about a mental construct, right? It's about a mental construct. That means that people have a role because of, uh, you know, cognitive things, right? People are learning things. When you learn things. What do you do? You digest that one right? You will think you have your own judgement about what is the right, what sort of institution the society need to build, right. So by doing so, we can see the institutional changes start taking place, and, uh, when you that that is start thinking place, we can see that evolve over time and again. It's the key to understanding the historical chain. That perspective, by the way, is very important for our economic students, right? The student in economics, We lack of this kind of historical perspective. But when you look at the institution economics and apply that theory in explaining what's going on in reality, you know Yeah, this is the important thing, right? Hi. Hi. History will be important. Lecture one. I mentioned those kind of, uh, the big idea about that change. So putting that perspective in looking at what's going on, especially for developing country, is so valuable, right? If you don't trace this back to the sorry, the history. You know, basically, we have a much lack lack of understanding about what's going on and institution being demonstrated in both formal. You know, those are the the property rights, the rules of law, the legal system and the S, but also the informal one. The nouns right, the his sorry, the values and those are informal. If if you don't look at the history, you do like a sociological development of society, you have nothing. You have no knowledge about that informal institution and the enforcement again. You know, we we mentioned that one is also important that historical change in the institutional setting is being, uh sorry in the institutional setting is being regarded or being demonstrated by two features. Number one is the, uh is what is a past dependent, right? The past dependent. What happened now is all being determined by what happened in the past. That's why later on, you know, we probably don't have time to elaborate that one. That means the the the historical change of matters. In a way, it has a demonstrates the pattern of a pause dependent. That means we cannot just jump. We cannot just, uh of course, the radical social change is the revolution, right? And, uh, you knock down the old system, you try to build a new one, and, uh, but in most cases, they failed the former Soviet Union when they before they were thinking there's a blueprint. That blueprint was seeing that, uh, you know, because the socialist and the central planning is a very inefficient the core. The key problem of that system is associated with the lack of a market. So therefore, logically, you can see that, uh, well, the solution is that, you know, knock down the central planning the system and establish the market system and, uh, with the hope we can do it overnight. But imagine Imagine all the legacies of the planning. Uh, system. Imagine about a lack of adjustment of people's thinking and, uh, to about those chain. So the reform go went ahead, you know, knock down the system and try to build a market system overnight. It didn't happen. So therefore, you create a huge institutional vacuum in which, you know those are illegal. The criminals, you know, those, uh, oligarchies, you know, or the they are doing the things play that role. And later, of course, there's a lot of changes going on, but people suffer suffer a lot. The production, the GDP, the standard of living all suffer. So that example is the is the lack of this positive dependence in a way. Right. So the key lesson from that one is that the institution be the change you have to take into account about those, uh, the past dependence right in the way. But gradually, of course, you know, Vietnam, China that they did in a gradual fashion about the change of the the central system and, uh, into other market system in allocating resources through time, so quite effective And, uh, of course, there's a big story about this. This comparison between, uh, for this so called the Big Bang approach right, The Soviet Union, former Soviet Union compared with the gradually approach, the graduate approach demonstrated by this kind of, uh, the past dependence. And it's so useful to make adjustment, gradually trial and error and that policy adjustment over time. And by doing so, you can see the society basically become a rather stable in a way as a compared with a radical change which again, you know, people suffering through that one. Another feature of institutional change over time, and I just mentioned about the power dependent. Another one is actually related to the example I have just outlined, which is about an incremental change. So institution radical change is very rare. French Revolution is one which is a very radical right. But soon after that, the French Revolution took place immediately the scholar, especially from England, and try to absorb what's actually going on this kind of a radical social change and how that impact where the political, economic, social and legal system down the track So the the key lesson being, uh, learned in a way. And so therefore you can see still the monarchy still in England and in many parts of Europe, in Japan and, uh, and other countries as to compare with a more kind of a secular kind of a political, uh, system, right? So it's not a conclusive. We can see that it's not conclusive, but somehow you can see many example in institution is incremental. When you look at the past 70 years of experience of a developing country, you can see that there's no such a thing as a dramatic change, right? And that's why when those projects by World Bank International Monetary Fund, you know, doing projects in developing country following the principle of the so called the Washington consensus, right? But oh, you know most of them failed. Why is that principle are very you somehow right, that apply to the former Soviet Union getting market right, getting the price right, getting the market system being established. Other things will be gradually put in place, right? The the Washington consensus is the same thing. We have a discussion towards the end of the lecture, but about Washington consensus was is also the textbook mentioned about the Beijing consensus, right? What's the what are the differences of that one? Many things, that is, the lack of those incremental is incremental changes. Why is that one that's relating to the NA nature of the institutional changes apply to to to to to many countries. So those are the things I think already mentioned about, uh, uncertainties and the predictability we already mentioned. But this one is especially applied to the role of the discussion of entrepreneurship. All right, entrepreneurship is so important in the way, and, uh, be it in a developing country or developed country is the same thing, right When you have this, uh, economic activities driven by entrepreneurs, you can see that, uh, the structural changes and the growth and the innovation it all being, uh, happening so so very important task for developing country is not so much about us activity or project driven by government. It's actually you unleash through the institutional changes unleash the spirit of entrepreneurship because by doing so, we can give you the, uh, the summary later on about them. By doing so, the, uh, those productive activity can be can be, uh, flourishing rather than unproductive, unproductive or even destructive one. Of course, in in modern time, we know the, uh the entrepreneurial behaviour is also very much, uh, very much related to other dimension as well. It's not so much about, um, simple institution about, uh, of course. You know, the, uh what we call it the property rights, right? Intellectual problems included, but actually including many other dimension, the key dimension. And, uh, one thing is about, uh, the environmental right and the condition the the the entrepreneur cannot just go along, right, produce and pollute. No. Now they have to think about those, uh, the boundaries. And another one is the, uh is the social standard, right? Is the social criteria whether the firm have to to pay those attention. There's so much in debate those issues in the, uh, in history or the history of economic thought. So by then, you know people saying that you know you don't bother firm are firms. Let the firm to flourish right for profit maximisation without really thinking about the social responsibility or even the environmental, you know, conditions. It's not their job. That's the job. Is the market failure. So you have to internalise those things right, pollution and other things by government. So let the firm to to act as a firm. But now the thinking is changing is a very fundamental. So when we learn the institution economic, you have to thinking about those additional dimension which are imposing some kind of a constraint on the private firms. So when you're doing that one, you can say, Well, you know, that environment is changing. So therefore the institution has to be, you know, uh, developed the new setting up, especially the so called regulatory institution and, uh, and as well as the policy. So those are related. If you are interested, I can post to water that a new article. We are talking about a modern entrepreneurship. OK, I'll do it after today's lecture. So when you have this one, the, uh, the things become a more pre, uh, predictive And, uh and, uh, the definition is very useful definition. If you learn those kind of nose and the Justin Lin and the new G their definition very early on. And, uh, these, uh, the institution can be defined in terms of the extent of property rights protection, the degree to which laws and the regulations are fairly enforced, not arbitrarily informed as we know it. And so so so many. Uh, uh. Examples. The ability of government to protect individual against the economic shocks, you know, stabilising things and provide a social protection, you know, legitimising things and the extent of a political, you know, on the, uh, on the corruption right again, that's a kind of a legitimising thing. Without a government role, market probably will be become, uh you just can't imagine, you know, will be wild, right? And, uh, there's no kind of a purple order for doing that one for developing country again. Those kind of thinking are outlined in the first, uh, you know, uh, seminar, getting the price, right? Right to getting policy right? And to getting institution, right, Right. And, uh, perhaps perhaps even more so because institution covers so many other dimension, including the human, uh, learning right. Learning become so important. Why learning is important because the individual are no longer as a are being assumed the way as a rational, right, rational human being. Right, because the people have their own independent thinking. So while you're doing so, you will have a very important contribution towards what's actually going on in the society. And remember, did not mention about, uh, another sense three level of understanding about human capital. Elector what I did, I think, and later on, you can see the same thing and human capital for the use of a productive use. And, uh, according to another thing, it's only the lowest level, the third level of our understanding, right? Participating in the production and the two more level above that one is what number one for learning for human capital is what is for human freedom, Right is for human development. That's the highest noble goals of those, uh, of learning. The second one is one. The second is the level of the social participatory, the participation in the social activity. That point is very, very much related. What? I have just mentioned about the role of a human being and the contribution to the societal change. Can you link that one now very important to link that one otherwise, you know, society is a society institution is, uh, nothing to do with me, right? This kind of thinking, uh, nothing to do, in fact, is very much close closely related what we learn and what we do. All right, so that is a sense of, uh, the contribution by individual. Once you have this, uh, institutional perspective, it all changed. It all changed. Even the motivation of your learning also changed, right? It's not so much confined by my own consideration about my future career and the development. It's also my role in the broader society, right? And, uh, in a broader kind of a community is very much related. And the community, in a sense, is so important, I think from now on is even more important against all these ITA I and all this artificial intelligence. Right? So, uh, about a about a human, uh uh, uh, communities, right. The interaction, that's why the group discussion will be also is so important, because that's a form. Those kind of, uh uh encourage those kind of interaction. Right? So the idea is not just for learning, but also share those ideas. I think that is also related to another key point. Uh, let me just jump. Oh, I thought Yeah. By the way, let me just, uh, emphasise what I think. This is a page I forgot that one. Anyway, Institution of human capital is related, right? Those are learning. But that last point is also important. Is that the You remember the the similar one we were talking about. Uh, develop the strategy, right? Remember, in a similar one, we one we talk about development strategy, right? Can you still remember the key messages there? Why? Developing country need a strategy? And during the crisis, what happened? What? What sort of things we learn, what sort of a new strategy is important. So please refer back to the, uh that knows right. But here when we talk about institution that is also related to development strategy, right? The last point here an effective development strategy. We seek the mechanism that increase a society's capacity to process information and ideas. So at that time, they didn't mention those kind of a dimension. We mentioned about the importance of, uh, the strategy to emphasising the mobilising better the resources right into productive use. We also mentioned about the dimension about inclusiveness. That's also important that the the the strategy is not for the social elite. You know, the people or very rich people, is the inclusiveness that is also very important. But now I just we can when we do the institution, we can add in another dimension to it. That dimension is to the mechanism is actually the concrete one, right? The mechanism that increases society's capacity to process information and ideas. And again, this is a learning, right? I think it is, uh, the, uh, the lecture also refer to I can't I can't remember the, uh we'll come back to the democracy shortly. And nature, I think. Yeah, it was Yes. OK. Yeah. Inclusive of political. This is already mentioned, right? Being discussed. Human freedom. We are already just mentioned. Oh, here. You know, these rules are the rules of the game. Are institution basically right? And the rules that govern human interaction are so decisive for economical growth. Remember, entrepreneurship and the rules of the, uh you know, the rules of the game that very survival and the prosperity of humankind depends on the right institution. Not only that, but also the fundamental human values that underpin them. Now, this is also an important message from this lecture institution is not just outside us. Institutions are not just a dry stuff. Right? Regulation The rules of the law and etcetera, there's a very important is the human values underpin it. That means the this is very somehow being being less emphasised when we learn institution. So institution, just institution right. The rules of law and everything and the contract enforcement, et cetera, is actually a value there. It's not just a principle per SE but also have a human value That means the human value regarded this kind of institution are very necessary for us. Is it necessary for us? The, uh you know, for the, uh for the society, right to flourish or to develop in a very healthy way. So if it's not, we know the things will go through crisis, right, The turbulence. And then we learn that the things So this is the actually reflect the nature of a historical chain. So by doing so, we can see the human value. So what are the value there? What sort of a value? This is related. I think you can refer to the lecture in a similar one at that time. I also discussed this, uh, kind of a normative, right. Those are value. Those are value things right by the human being. And at at that time I also touch upon one thing That means when you have a normative analysis, not just a positive per E. The things we learn from the standard textbook about the mainstream economy is all about a positive thing, less less about a normative thing. But however, when you have this, uh, institutional changes when you have, uh, what sort of a strategy developing country need to have when you have this kind of thinking again, the value added value judgement will be evolved Because it's not just what it is, right? It is what it should be. It what it should be. This is the value of judgement. So I want to put this, uh uh, linking this point with the things I discussed, you know, in that one and, uh, about those are human value linking to what those human value underpins. Underpins those institutions all the institutional building over time so you can see all these law courts right? Also, the regulatory changes the debate in the society about that one. Eventually you can see those are very well established. The cases which all have a real impact on actual institutional changes are all underpinned by those human value, Those judgement. So if we don't have that one and when we come to the reality facing the reality the challenge of a of A of a of a development and then we have a we don't know, we can just focus the policy instrument, right? Get a tax cut or, you know, secure the tax revenue collection. And, uh, and, uh uh oh, how to implement the monetary policy, etcetera. So our mind, our focus is all on those, uh, policy instrument, right? They are important, but I think for students who learn this course, especially for this part of institution, I like you to thinking about how the normative how the human values can play a role but how we can form those kind of a value system. And to learn that one again, remember in the again similar one I mentioned about the link between the normative thing with, uh, more like a philosophy, for example, is a one dimension and a higher level of understanding. And, uh, and also perhaps also related to what? Is that the ultimate goal for human being? What ultimate? What is the ultimate goal. And, uh, do we just, uh, just try to make it rich is only a goal and the lack of attention to the human welfare right And, uh, the happiness of the people and et cetera. And the quality of life, for example, not just the GDP per SE, but also the quality of life. Those are the things when we think about those things. Then gradually you will build up your own thinking about those values, right? And of course, through learning, I think at the university we are learning we are not just learning some kind of, uh, the theory, Right, Per SE, we actually have those kind of a value added to it, and the institution economic will enable us to do so right. And then you will actually change. You know, it's not just, uh, you know, normal things, but it's, uh, as a human being, where as a you added, that dimension is become so important. III I feel that, uh, you know, I want to convey that message and, uh, perhaps, uh, absorbing those one. You need a bit of a practise, right? A bit of a more learning, but it's a red approach when you have that approach, you know, I think everyday life will become very meaningful everyday life, it become more meaningful because you will have a high motivation. Right? You have very clear goal about, uh, the way of treating the the process of learning. So by doing so learning, remember, in the, uh, last lecture, when we talk about economic growth, right, the economic development can be a function of the speed of learning. It all makes sense now, right? We have to learn more and to deal with that, uh, things when we, you know, organising all these things. We can see the society programme not just the growth, but the healthy development can be, uh, guaranteed. And, uh, so I think I missed. The one is about, uh is about, uh, about the democracy. I think everyone very keen about, uh, understanding the role of democracy in the context of the development. And, uh, so again, lecture Refer to a few things. Right barrel. In particular, democracy is not a key economic for the economic growth and, uh, and the property, right and et cetera. But also a few china, for example. He do documents that are now developed. The country did not develop on the basis of democracy very early on. So again, that is why the lessons of history are that the many institution deemed to be important for developing countries today emerged after not before economic development was taking place. Right? Give me an example. Korea, South Korea. Very rich, very developed economy, but started with a dictatorship, not democracy. Once the economy being developed, gradually, you can see the institutions are changing economic as well as the political. And now it's a democracy, right? But again, there's a certain things right. Institution form in developing country should not be imposed from outside, but should be allowed to evolve naturally and internally. So those are the the questions, and, uh, we need to keep in mind. But again, there's a close sorry cross country study, right? And, uh, didn't see rather weak link between a political system and economic development on average. And, uh, so you can use the example career example to illustrate those development or the evolution of the political institution as a, uh, as against the economic background. So, uh, and, uh, again, this is actually related to to the uh, the question we are going to focus on on the on the similar. Any question again. It is a is a lecture is a semester long course to cover those issue institution. So So I'm kind of a, uh sorry for the, uh, to put all the things you know in two hours. But nevertheless, I think it's important, because if you don't understand this institution, I think we are somehow very much lack understanding about the true nature of the development issues or development issues in policy and again review. Those are the big chart and about the evolution of thought. We have a lecture one and thinking about the key elements of institution, political or economic, and then thinking about linking that one to the reality. I know many students coming from a developing country. You know what you working through in government non-government institution. And, uh, you can look at what's actually going on in the country, right? And see now, from a different angle about the institutional dimension about the society change. So if you can do that one, that learning will continues, right? And, uh and, uh so you you read more. You will watch and more. And then gradually and more make the things become more, make more senses. So any questions? Yes, please. In one of your videos, you describe about a bad or you write it like that generates and we talk about that one. Very good question. Positive loop. Right. The feedback loop versus the negative one. And we're going to talk about that one for today's seminar, OK, The whole example is about that one negative. Thank you for raising that issue. Yeah. Any other question? So today we have, uh we don't have a group discussion. Our our talk about, uh, the, uh, seminar topic, Uh, right now. And, uh, we will come here at 1030 talking about how to, uh, write, uh, the the, uh, assignment, Right. Very useful. Otherwise. So we we, we we And so for discussion, you can do it among yourself or even thinking about that one. OK, but we don't have to group discussion or the presentation, so we don't have much time. All right? So if not, let me, uh could you, uh you mentioned to me that and, uh, Nicola and the first tutorial went quite quite ok quite well. So again, there's also that opportunity for you to to discuss bit more, right? Very relevant tutorial. Question. Similar question for today's lecture. So Friday is the opportunity, you know, for you to to discuss it more. Now let's focus on the similar topic. Thank you very much. Now again, the very good negative feedback. And, uh, and some positive one. So then you can think about in theory, when you have a red institution or good institution, they tend to is kind of a reinforce certain forces in the society right, which can produce a rather conducive result. Good institution. Why now? You can argue because good institution give you a right incentive, right? Or you can, uh uh, you can call this a payoff. Then the players, including the human being, are as individual. We responded to that, uh, you know, incentive. Right now, for example, if you have a very high payment, right for the payoff for the educated people, then you are motivated more people to do the education. Right? So there is a very important, uh uh, chart. I remember the US, the higher education PhD master as compared with the, you know, undergraduate and central, the the payoff chat. You can see the gap is actually increasing over time. But I heard that it's actually the things are changing. But that's due to other reasons. Right when you have this, uh, presented or people were motivated them to study. We know, you know, by study, sitting in the classroom, you know, you incurred opportunity cost, right. You can't do the things you do in other ways. But however, because of the future payoff very much higher, then you have a motivation to sit in the class. You know, do the do the doing the study. So that's the That's the right incentive. Right? But when when you have a more study, more people have higher education, human capital improve in the society, and then you can see the productive youth, right? And, uh, and, uh, and and a productive activity can also take place. This is the positive rule, right? The feedback and, uh, you continue to do so you can You can use many other examples about good institution, but they're also negative. That means that the institution become rather extractive, right? So therefore, institutions don't have this kind of, uh positive, uh, incentive in a way. And then you mope motivating people to do bad things, right? For example, if you have a lack of rules of law, right, you don't have a certain the property rights or guarantee through a constitution, for example, about the property rights, then people, especially intellectual property rights people are still right. They were still the any kind of, uh, invention. So why you have this No protection of that one for the innovators, for the entrepreneurs they don't do, they don't do the innovation anymore because those innovation cannot be guaranteed or protected through law and regulation. So what do you do? You do the other things run seeking you, trying to find the opportunity and to find the loopholes in the institution to do the things which is the, uh, sending a very bad signals, right? Very bad feedback. So other people will do the same. So what you see is a society which become a very corrupt, very corrupt. You can see it in in in certain developing country immediately, you can see that's the That's the problem with the institution, right? That's the way that the society are changing in a very negative thing. The loophole that the sorry. The negative loop we mentioned in the lecture, right? There are so many examples you can name that one. But let me focus a particular case in today's, uh, seminar again to illustrate the point you have just raised and the case of institutional failure in Latin America rising income inequality and challenge in fighting the pandemic. So during the pandemic as you know it, the region has 80% of the population, but accounted for the one third of the no covid death globally. That continent. This is the reality, right? Something of everyone being affected. But certain area region are being affected more than others. That's the case. Economic or social fallout has been among the most severe. The regional economy contracted by about 80%. That is the, uh, probably the worst things. Uh uh, in 2020 that particular year. And, uh, a lot of a country, you know, economy are contracted, but Latin America, you know the same thing. So what made the region so vulnerable? That is just the case, right? You can actually, for the recent assignment, right? It's a It's a kind of uh, examples, right? You can apply not just the Latin America but others. Now the course is for rising income. Inequality is already there. OK, it's not just the the the covid Latin America. The, uh you know, inequality. Inequality is not necessarily the outcome of economic growth, you know, Those are scholars like PT and others have mentioned it's not necessary. And, uh, economic growth can can develop in a more equitable, conducive way rather than but however, when we have a lack of a certain things right, institution will come back. And we know it demonstrated such a kind of a patter of a very high degree of income inequality. And I think that one I mentioned that one. Is it not necessary? The region has the word the biggest gap between the rich and the poor, the highest rate of violence, the worst performing economy and the rising social unrest and the political instability. You can you name it. Those problem you just name it is every everything happening in that continent. 90% of Latin America live in democracy. See, we just refer to in the lecture about the democracy 90%. But they didn't deliver that didn't deliver the outcome they expect as a conclusive political system. And, uh, sorry, not inclusive one. Before the pandemic, the reach, the 10% were estimated to hold a 70% of the regions of wealth, 10% versus 70%. And, uh, but you can also see that the same thing happened in the United States. Right? So that's another issue about, uh, inequality rising, falling and rising again So we can talk about that one so inclusive versus extractive when Joseph Stiglitz published a book about the price of inequality. So when I look at the title, I thought, Wow, it's about a developing country. No, The book is about the US, the price of inequality. So you read it. You can see that there is something happening in rich country as well after achieve those standard of living and and growth and then couldn't handle that issue. Well, because of a lack of a certain institutional development, especially the political institution anyway, the impact of rising inequality, what happened when you have a high degree of inequality? Rising income inequality takes a toll on trust in society. People don't trust each other, you know, when we talk about the market, Not the self legitimising right. All these things right? The trust is there and the normal circumstances Well, institution can help the rules of law. Right? So you have to obey those laws, right? But somehow lack of trust is also become a hurdle for economic development and the building, and and again the trust is being eroded, right? All in all, society now. So, uh so that's the thing in which, in turn, the prices everything from a foreign investment to innovation to entrepreneurship. So the word the lowest level of confidence in one another if people don't trust each other, OK, so how come you can build a nice society, uh, and talking about the poss right out of the, uh the growth from the of of GDP and etcetera. So something like it and always say how long it takes for a poor person to rise into the middle class. 2 to 3 generations in Denmark and Sweden, very poor people to be in a very established the middle class. The 4.5 among OECD members on average, sixth generation in Chile, nine in Brazil and 11 in Colombia. The worst of all countries. Survey. This is the survey, right? It takes almost like a forever for people to move from. Uh, you know, lower end of the social spectrum in terms of the income to the middle class. We know middle class. Who are they? Why middle class is important in the institutional changes when you have a very poor society, majority of them live in the poverty. There's no social forces being built to push for the social change and run institutional changes. So that's why when the C is inverted ere when they have an inverted euro curve, right, per capita income increase, income inequality rises, peaked and fall. What's that? Why, at a certain level of per capita income, you have a peak level of inequality and then it's improving. After that, it's all about that level of, uh, per capita income is socially is a social social, aided with the rising middle class in the society. So now when you look at the inverted, inverted new curve, it makes whole sense. Is it because of under the certain section of the the rising section of the curve, Peaked and and falling is all reflecting the institution. Those institutions push the change by the middle class. Why middle class are better because the middle class will call for what? After wealth being built. You know, the the being development they were ask the property rights protection because they are, you know, they got a wealth, but previously they don't bother. They are struggling, surviving right. But now they care about the property. Right? Right. So therefore, when you have a small number, probably you won't have a very strong forces. But when you build up that group of people, the middle class, they were pushed for the change. And when the changes happen, you can see policy, government, institution, they all responding to that request by the middle class, right? Even political things we mentioned about the career things right. And once the economy develop those people, the people ask the change and gradually the political change are taking place as well. So the middle class become such an important thing. But if it takes a long time 11 generation for people to become a middle class just too late, right, Almost like an impossible it right to form those kind of a social forces which should push for the changes. Almost like impossible. So people somehow being trapped, being trapped in the low equilibrium trap. We know. Have you heard about the middle income trap? Right. We'll talk about that phenomenon in one of the seminars later on. Right. But this one is related to sort of low equilibrium trap or low income trap. You being trapped there very difficult to push through that one. And, uh, middle income trap is another kind of things we can discuss later on. A couple of theory associated with that one Thailand, Malaysia, and, uh, and people talking about the China now, right, once you reach the certain level per capita income now, suddenly you you know there's no no, uh, momentum for growth. It's just just stay there and again, you know? So it's a It's a very, very important lesson that can be learned from that one Now, to find a solution with those kind of a background higher taxes for the work. You know, for most, uh, well of people, every tax is 23% GDP compared with, uh, you know, th 34%. So that means the government will probably have to make some kind of an initiative. You know, if they're so rich, you know, 10% you know, almost 70% of the world, you know, government need to tax the rich in a way right to get the resources for the purpose of the development. And the second one is an expansion of the social programme, those kind of a minimum wages and a pension. But again, this is a debatable when people also argue when you have a very early phase of development, if you are imposing too much the social obligation on firms firm where lack of motivation for them to to develop, they said, is the burden. It's a burdensome for them. And so that's why the the pension of minimum wages, those are the things in many countries, is being development after at a certain level of development and rather than, you know, hide out when you have a very low level of development. OK, so it's debatable. But the key is to get economics to grow through reform and institutional changes, closing the gender gap, trade, political reform leading towards the more, uh, equal parts. So here I refer to the lecture we have just covered right? The lecture about, uh, remember the cargo law cargo law is about. But, uh, but the roo, Uh, the development. The cities, right. Remember what sort of a percentage of a cap capital in GDP needed for economy to to take off very good. Anyway, remember, it's a 10%. So that means it's very difficult for those economy when you have a lack of a capital accumulation. Because, uh, you know, the saving is very low, so therefore you need a certain push. You need a certain push. That push can come from outside. Even, uh, Latin American can really recognise the importance. So that's why you can see they borrow a lot. What, what? Because they want to have that push for the economy to take off at least a 10% at the time. But again, you know so many other factors affecting them. So running into the debt crisis because of what? Because it's borrowing too much, right? The example I gave you in lecture the similar one. I don't know whether next week that example will be become a more clearer because this is the learn. We learn on the growth right So the growth is, uh is determined by saving and capital O ratio. Right? And I'll give you example about 5% of growth and, uh, and the three capital O operation. You need a 15% of saving, but where you can have that saving and, uh, guaranteed in a way to enable you to grow. So if you have a 10% of saving, you have to borrow 5% or you have to compromise growth either way. Right? So again, so that is the, uh that is the one of the the concern, right? So even though there's a social and reform institution but again guarantee that the capital accumulation in the early phase of development become so important and, uh, this is OK building the inclusive the state producing fair society. Aga against that, such a vast income inequality, right, is is a big challenge. That's why the the left is the party. When they make the election, they will always see that No, we need to tax rich. We need to tax the multinational firms and, uh, to have a more kind of equitable development. But once they are being in power, they all facing those kinds of difficulty couldn't do very much at all time and time again, you know, promising. Promising people saying Wow, Yes, that's the government they need, but again, once they are in power. And this, of course, due to the history due to the P, the interaction between political and economic forces. So building those kind of society is still a dream for many countries in Latin America. Now, the royal institution, which is I won't repeat because we have this, uh, discussion already right relevant for the environment, stability, protection of a property, right, The rules of law and enforcement of contract and, uh, the, uh, the good example in, uh, Amazon in Brazil, right? And, uh, why people are, you know, cutting. Cutting the the forest right continuously the property right. And the lack of those kind of institution the protection and the wrong incentive for people to to get involved the irregularities, the corruption of the government and et cetera. So, But again, you can see the, uh the the the the environmental. The consequence of that is very severe. So those are, uh those are the examples inclusive, inclusive political system that holds in check the power of elite and allow the broader based participation in political economic activity. Again, this is the linking back to my previous point about the participation in the society of development by individual. Right. So all these things you can you can connect right with those the key message you can connect with, uh those are also development issue, government effectiveness in managing taxation and a and a public expenditure for social cohesion and stability. Right. So, you know, it's not just a policy per SE. So those policy have to achieve those broader goals, right? Not just the push for capital, uh, accumulation or even human capital per SE. You have overall goals, right? And, uh, those goals are fit in with those institutional framework. That framework in considering about many dimensions and not just a single dimension, but many dimension, including the social dimension as well. And, uh, so that's you can lead to all kind of, uh uh, this one I won't repeat. And, uh, there's also a chance, you know, macroeconomic observation, growth, accounting framework, but with a structural changes behind it that were determined by more macro foundation entrepreneurship preferences and that that link back to the institution. So institution all the way up. And now for our economic students. So we just understand that the top one gross accounting input of factory production output and the TFP that's it. And it makes sense about implication, but lack of understanding about the three layers three level of understanding behind that, the overall macroeconomic observation. So once you learn institution economic, you know what's actually happened behind that one, right? So, you know, much richer and not only know, understand those things, but also you understand better about what sort of policy should be put in place and what sort of institutional changes are needed to nurture to unleash the spirit of entrepreneurship, for example, in economic development. So right, incentive, right solution, right. Incentive and, uh, right approach. Then you can see the overall growth can take place. Otherwise, people say no. The lack of growth is the lack of capital is a lack of, uh uh, uh labour and lack of GAP. That's it. We know TFP, Of course. We discussed, uh, last week, right, But, uh, it's too simple in a way. You need to go much deeper to see the underlying forces right institutional underpinning for those changes. And, uh, but again added that one, This is the the nouns and the value right also play an important role. So good society, very prosperous, very harmonious. In a way, it's all those dimensions are all there. And, for example, the trust was in this so much lacking in the society, including the developed country. Right? But how we can build a better society through nurturing those kind of a mutual trust, the sense of a community, right? So all become important. They are all related to institutional economy. All right, so that's the one. Positive. Yes. Sorry. Uh, back to your question now, positive versus negative feedback loops, in example. Over there. Ok, I'll give you an example already, but it's a very important to understand how institution that encourage prosperity create positive feedback loops that prevent the effort but lead to undermine them. Why? Elite has an incentive because when you have a loophole in the system, they were why you have a rent sitting there. They are engaged in rent seeking. They are motivated to to do that one. But when you have this very established system, the rules of the law for the protection of property rights. The enforcement of a contract when you have all these things, you know very difficult for them to do so the check and the constraint on the elite on the politician, right to do the right thing and how institution can create poverty that generate negative feedback loops that endure. And, uh, so that's another side of, uh, the thing. So I use a lot of American country, but you can use any country in the world to find them because institutions are not perfect, you can always find certain things. The loopholes are there, so people people take advantage of them. Even in rich country here, the corruption in Australia is also happening right The same thing. So whether you can find a certain element at one to strengthen the real institution to strengthen the mechanism which encourage those positive loop and correct those which can lead to the negative one right by what? But whenever there's a crisis, whenever there's a case of corruption, when you can find it, there's a certain you know, problem with the institution that you can see that the patch up now it's doing on a daily basis. You can see the, uh you know, the the scene now. So Latin America is already Oh, that's, uh, the finally to to summarise those, uh, key. Uh uh, character of, uh, of Asa Molo. He is the one of the leading, uh, scholar on that one. Enforcement of a property, right. The rules of law so that individuals have the incentive to save, invest and then take risk. That's entrepreneurship, right? And, uh, red red constraint on those in the position of power so that they cannot expropriate the resources of the country for their own benefit. And, uh, can you imagine, in the past few decades, right, there's a massive of foreign aid following into Africa, Not a lot of Africa continent. But then you can look at the statistics and the mo the money actually transfer out of the continent is more than the total foreign aid following into the continent. How come those money meant to be spent in the continent for development? But somehow those money being transferred back to Europe, to North America, to international, you know, financial, uh, field, not right. So again, that's a reflecting. What actually happened so constraint on those in in power. And, uh, again, that's due to the political things. But also the, you know, the lack of a check and a balance and, uh is another issue equal opportunity for all so that everyone has the incentive to better themselves and to participate, productive in society and, uh, very difficult to implement. But that's why when people were saying that the better have a very competitive market because the market, in the sense, you know, people compete according to their own. But somehow the those kind of a mechanism is not function in a way in any society, you can see it's not perfect. So therefore equal opportunity. You know, you have to base on something, something else in a way, And, uh, on a social, the political rather than just the economic considerations. That's I think that's all. The question is a very consistent and because we have only about a 15 minutes and, uh, but thinking about those, uh, we can have a maybe brief discussion just about not divided in the group. But, uh, seeing how you can, that is, what institution do you think are the most important for encourage investment in developing country. Right? And, uh what Oh, even not just a development encourage, uh, investment, but also encourage, uh, innovation. What's all the institution? Immediately. Intellectual property rights. Right. But again, you can trace this back. Why is it difficult for those, uh, inte intellectual property right to be developed And, uh, what are the key characteristic for good institution? And how do they determine a positive feedback loop we already mentioned, right? Several things. And how does institution play a key role in merging the spirit of entrepreneurship again? I already emphasised that several times And why this is important for growth and development. And, uh, let me, uh, mention again that, uh, only one lecture on a topic it should cover the whole semester, just the one institution. So if you can, uh, uh, digest a lot of things are it's OK, but this lecture meant to encourage you just opening your perspective and also motivated to look at the things differently. I think that's probably the most important one and again learning the institution involving so many dimensions, right? So, like history, for example, I also mentioned about the sociology before history of economic thought history, economic development all matters in a way. But institution economic is all is also not settled to conclude in. In a sense, it's still debatable. And, um, I have, uh, the, uh the Handbook of Institutional Economics and being newly published last year, A year earlier. And when I look at that one, I still, you know, in many dimensions. You know, people are not still not in, uh, in agreement with the scene. So the subject matter continue to evolve over time. So the learning never stop for us in a way. And, uh, so not looking at a settled thing, right? Certain things is being settled. No is evolving over time. I think that also reflecting part of the nature for human being right and certain weakening in a way. And we don't learn the lesson. Sometimes the positive loop is not working in a very conducive way and so much disruption to it. So those are the things and also our lack of knowledge, lack of learning and, uh, but also pointed out, I think the positive thing right, this is continue to learn, right? In a way. So that's the purpose of, uh and uh, So before two comes, I feel free to move around because we don't have a break. I like to use this 15 minutes. Ask you to tell me. Is that OK? Is it useful? It all being too much. And, uh, but whether useful but importantly, why is it relevant for looking at the issue in development policy? Is that clear? Anything. Any thought And also our online students. And, uh and, uh, please do and, uh, speak. And, uh, we'll show you on a big screen when you speak and, uh, the so again, so digest a bit and, uh, and and free to discuss. So let's have from one group for today, or useful or not useful. Difficult or not difficult? Yes. Phil is Yeah. I was just like, um I was very curious about

SPEAKER 2
if there's such a thing, and you know, it's real, that that depends. So I was just, like, reflecting. How do How does change begin? Yeah, Yeah, right. Like, um, it would seem that if revolution like changes coming from the bottom would not be something that is empirically here. How do you say it isn't sustainable? Because there are legacies of of the past that comes to, like, you know, impinge even in the present. Yeah. So if that kind of change from the bottom isn't something that as history, um, sort of preview to us or or taught us that it's not sustainable, then I was thinking it It's got to come from the middle class or from those from the top, those who have the higher bargaining power to like institute change.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, So your question OK, OK, so I won't answer your question now or comment now. I'd like to hear more so I can give you a final, uh, response towards the end. Ok, good. I thanks.

SPEAKER 3
Thank you. Thank you. So I feel like we talked so much about institution, but I feel like this word is too, too blurry. Too vague, too, general. I mean, is there any Is there anything that we can because the definition the rule of institution is to govern human interaction system decisive for for economic growth, something like that. What? What? We can tell that it's a good institution or not Good. But I mean so focus on the words itself institution and institutional economics, which is quite big and general for me, which is I mean, can you try to, like, Like, like, make it more more specific or give some of the examples? I know what is good institution. Um, but some of the sometimes that I feel like institution. Uh, how can I How can I differentiate institution away from away from such? Like some political structure, this kind of social norms or rule of law, This kind of like Like, like the the words that I'm not familiar with?

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, Very good question. Very good question. And, uh, I'd like to address that question. Uh uh, shortly. That means the, uh, institution, uh, economist looks rather weak, rather not. So clear cut. In a way, you're talking about the formal, informal and enforcement. And, uh, but, uh, the question is that we need a kind of a clear structure in looking at the institution. And, uh, perhaps also the is also related to our training. In a way. The training in the in the mainstream, very mathematical, right. Very clear kind of model. And you can follow, and you can actually use data to test those kind of a theory. Right? So, uh, but institution economy is very difficult to quantify, even though in recent days the scholars start using the quantitative means to capture those institutions so it can be done in a way. But whether institution reflect the nature of that one. And, uh, I'll give you one example. Paul Krugman. He was the He the the Nobel. Lauren, uh, in economics were established by the he claimed, you know, about, uh, decades ago. He said development, economic. The things we learn now is that why the development? Of course it didn't. Right. We can. Still learning the things and the theory. Everything is still evolving. One of the reasons he was in that the development economic is not a very establish is that is that the economics is a sense science. So if you have a science, you not have a very, uh, clear, uh, frame work, uh, through the mathematical or the theorising, the medical model you call, you won't call it a science. So he said no. So he was wrong. And, uh, you know, you can't judge uh uh particularly social sciences and, uh, as, uh, whether you can apply to mathematics or or not, so you can see the like the lecture one I mentioned about, uh, you know, uh, sh uh, the remark, right. The majority of the people in the world are poor. If we knew the economics of being poor, we would know much of the economics that really matter. So those are the view, right? But also, look at the lecture. One, When you see the lecture one, you can see there's a very different divided right. Some people are seeing that the mainstream are not suitable for development. The issue. Some of us in that now, you know, after, you know, turn. Uh, now it become more relevant in a way, so those kind of differences are always there. So I think it is very good for you to raise that issue. So let's think about that one. Perhaps, uh, from my experience in recent years and looking at the institution economic, uh, I felt it's a very powerful tools, and that's something we cannot you know. We cannot do without it. And, uh, the like. Also, I mentioned in lecture one about, uh, the mainstream right and one of the very important assumption that they assume that the transaction cost is zero right, but transaction costs are non zero. If you agree that the transaction costs are nonzero, you agree institution matter. That's a very simple answer to that one. We know transaction costs everywhere. So how come you can say we can do it without institution? Anyway, let's think about that one and more car. Yes, please.

SPEAKER 4
Thinking with Ray, actually, that the concept of institution seems very it's It's very broad, but it's also felt very intangible. But what I did find actually very useful was a similar group. He had that four categories. I found that useful, um, the market creating market regulating. But I'm just wondering whether that is also, you know, when you try to categorise things, is that are you narrowing it too much that you're not capturing what it is? I found it useful, but yeah, so whether that that's

SPEAKER 1
also that's a very, very good Questions and Arthur Molo have a very big book on theory of economical growth. Previous book is somehow less important role than institution, but he's a big vol. I got it in my office a big vol. The final chapter. Yeah, it's all about institution that is is through theorising through modelling things. We can see that, uh, they are all important determinants for growth. Right? But somehow it also lack of explanation power in explaining act growth. So his final chapters in that big volume is all about institution. And now, as I mentioned that, increasingly people actually look at the property rights protection, the intellectual property look at the quality of both economic and political institution in, uh, in explaining what's actually going on economic growth. So I think it's a narrowing now the gap And, uh, even though, uh, as you mentioned, you know, those, uh, because we have only one lecture, right? So we we narrow down, we extracted the key elements of that one. So that's why my previous remark is seen that it actually to serve the purpose of for you to understand the importance of that, but also importantly, to link the reality, especially for development issue to in that link, that reality to see whether we can do or without. So that's the key key message. Right again, learning continues. So, yeah, I think there are to connect with, um

SPEAKER 2
your your comments as well. My own reflection in this is like? Yeah, I found Rodricks, um, categorisation of institutions quite useful. But then I felt like that isn't enough. Like, for instance, if you find yourself like in your own country, in your own context, you have, um, market regulating institutions. That in itself isn't like you. You gotta understand that in the context of the social norms, combine that with the with the values in that. In that context, if it is operating well, like, for instance, you have the environment and you have ambient standards in a particular sector. But the way how that is enforced, if there are loops in the way those policies are being enforced say I am the inspector, the the the the pollution inspector and I'm not my value judgement or my values are not ethically sound. That's gonna create rent an opportunity for those who will violate or who have violated that invite and pollution ambient standard. So, like I can pollute as long as I pay right. So So that's kind of like just the presence, tangible presence of these institutions, your market stabilising institutions, your market creating institutions here, market regulating institutions, those tangible present institutions doesn't mean that things are are are gonna be OK in in my context, you you gotta understand it with the values and whether these values in that context are ethically sound. So very good.

SPEAKER 1
You try to answer the questions for me, but, uh, let's keep keep that discussion going on. I think it's one more student here or one more all. All right, so this is very good. I think that's the whole purpose of, uh, you You, uh this is actually very good for our learning process. You know, find out. You know, the relevance of the course content, you know, And, uh, not just against the background reality, but also against our the structure of our own learning. Right, Because as I mentioned, we somehow our mind is also being influenced by what we have learned already in a way. So therefore, it's very natural for people you know, student to to voice a certain concern, especially about this year. This is the subject matter. In fact, institution economics and, uh, is the, uh and the and the debate with the the mainstream. Economics is happening in the past 100 years, right? More than 100 years now. And since the early 20th centuries. You know, you start doing that, they continue to argue and and, uh, between these two, But I think I can probably safe to say that, uh, the institution of economic now and, uh, become a more influent. I mean, compared with the previously more influential and, uh, people in in in a way, especially latest one, you know, the Handbook of Institutional Economic. Seeing that I, I read some article in the chapter in the book I. I feel that, uh, people were saying that, you know, it's already there. You know, you cannot just ignore the reality about, uh, those kind of a human institution functioning there. In reality, how come you can ignore all these things? So, for those are very passionate about arguing that one. So I feel a lot of sympathy on on those things again. Let me emphasise we only one lecture, right? And, uh, maybe too much for them to digest. Never mind. It's the beginning. All right. It's the beginning of learning once you have a mole. And, uh, perhaps you can do my institution course next year. And, uh, so to learn more, uh, on, uh, on that one. So, uh, and I try to convince you about, uh, where is, you know, aspect of, uh, of, uh, the real The reality actually link very closely to the institutional aspect. All right. And, uh, quantifying that one is a challenge, but it's actually start. People start doing that one, OK? Yeah. And now we have a very good So next. Oh, we have. Oh, sorry.

SPEAKER 5
Hi. Yeah, no, I just want to I want to share some of my, um, insights on, um, particularly on the institutions. Um, arrangements. Um, I'm not sure if I'm picking up with what's been discussed with the on campus, um, students, but I would like to, um, just to have some thoughts around, uh, the traditional institutions of many Pacific islands. Um, Per SE, Samoa. Um, with, uh, with regards to the democracy, uh, institutionalisation or I would say the modern, um, way of governing. Um, we there were There were already preexist, um, institutions before, um, the democracy or government, Uh, formalising in the, um, in many Pacific islands. And, um, this is something that's been brought in, uh, post, uh, post colonisation. And I would say that in order to have a successful or a favourable economy for investments. Uh, now we've R we've come to realisation that marrying or finding, um, finding tune, um, in marrying traditional institution as well as the modern way of governing. Um, and this is something that's very favourable in in many Pacific islands or many developing islands that we have now. Hence the many projects, um, investment from, uh, um, donor partners. And it it is recognised that traditional institutions such as um, the chieftain shift system, um, plays a very crucial role in, um in giving or a applying positive, um, characteristics in many, um, societies. And so I would like to add on to that. And, um, and in many, many there was a There were already groups in place in structuring, um, the way of life or the primitive way of lives. Um, before now we have governments. Uh, we have the different, uh, policy institutional arrangements that now governs, um of our economy. Thank you very much. I hope I I made myself clear very much.

SPEAKER 1
And uh, that's a That's a very significant question. The question is that when we have a very, uh, primitive society, right and the South Pacific is just one example, but many other parts of us would. Also, when you have that one, you have a whole set of, uh, market competitive institution, political, economic, social and the legal institution. But now we have a very, uh, PRI primitive right, A stage of development. How can those later comers all in those society to incorporate or embrace those modern institution in multidimensional things? And, uh, that's the one, the very important question. The second one is that the weather being informal, not formal institution will facilitate our economic development. Given the environment, you know, the condition, the history and the state of development we have. That's a very significant question. And this is also related to the so-called, the Washington consensus. Right When I refer to that one, you know, the project of being applied following those principles, it didn't work very much and a lot of failures. And, uh, so part of that one is the, uh is the, uh is started recognising by doing so about this, uh, nature of the social, uh, changes and the development in those of society. So basically, perhaps they're not ready to introduce the whole lot, you know, modern formal institution into the country, you know, like, uh, you know, you referred so But on the other hand, institution, remember, covers the three elements, right? Four more informal and enforcement, right? The informal institution is a part of that one. You refer to the informal institution Also work in a way, you know, very harmonious in, uh, you know, uh, based on the traditional value, right, rather than the formal market principles or the rules of the law. And, uh, to to guide people's behaviour. And, uh, the village, the local, uh uh, communities. They work in a way, without those formal institution, they can still work there, in fact, in a quite a harmonious way. So those are the role of informal institution, so you can refer to to, uh to the, uh to what we have discussed about those informal institution. But however, there's a one issue there once the economy being developed, right, and maybe it may take a long time, but somehow, in theory, we can see those society also being developed. So in that process, we can see the economy, the scope become wider, you know, foreign trade foreign investment also start happening later on. Then you are required a certain formal institution put in place. Otherwise, how come you can attract people from you know, other countries where they follow those kind of institutions to invest in your own country? So this is happening in a gradual fashion, but it's happening. And then I am. I had a paper on that topic many years ago. I also presented a friend of the colleague from World Bank and, uh, in Vietnam, and, uh so I have a model to to capture those transition from being informal to being formal. So basically, before there's a the the big change, you have this relative payoff relative payoff. Being that means the payoff of, uh, of uh of being informal is a higher. The benefit is higher than the cost incurred by being informal in those stages when you don't have a separate institution. But however, when the per capita income increases, then you can see the start changing the scope of a division of labour, start widening, more trading goods and et cetera. So requires those kind of a formal institution to be in place. Then, after that, when you can see the payoff of being informal, the cost actually higher than the benefit of being informal. Then those structural changes were motivated people or the government in a way to move towards more formalising of institution. And then the benefit from being formal were off site. Those are negatives in the cost of being formal, for example, being previously, you can settle the the business dispute in a very informal way, right? And so. But now you have to do it somehow through court. And there's a legal means of a settle set in that one. And so so so gradually, the demand for being informal also increases. The payoff is also a benefit. But then let me give you sorry to just for a couple of minutes. Then I'll give you another theory. That theory from a professor from Gregory Shaw from a Princeton University, and he wrote very short article. He was seeing that what developed developing country at the early phase of development at the early phase of development you know being formal may be quite costly because what, because you don't have that institution put in place to begin with, right? So therefore, relying on the informal means of doing business actually is the way to go. And, uh, so my paper, uh uh is actually falling those kind of a thought, but, uh, again, the paper sitting there for more than 20 years now because, uh, I tried to model theorising that model, and, uh, but I couldn't do it, so I I won't publish. I didn't publish that paper. So exactly 20 years now, more than 20 years now. But anyway, so this is the reflecting the the question you raised and it's a finding to many. Yeah, that's right. And the modern system, informal and formal. A common practise now in the Pacific Island and proposing efforts to address the environment. Yeah, very similar to what I have just mentioned, right? So being formal or informal is really related to the payoff, benefit or cost relative benefit and payout. And that is also due to the institution, as I mentioned in today's, you know, seminar and the lecture right, because the institution embodied incentive structure that in structure, where motivate people to do business in a particular way, be informal or informal for those you know, Pacific Island countries, you know, such as you know, the condition there. So if you have a very formal it actually unrealistic to have a whole set of institute formal institution being built there overnight, like the case, I refer to the reform, the radical reform of a former Soviet Union. You know, it didn't work in a way. So anyway, it it's very good, very significant question and, uh, for us to think about and again, Uh, number one is the informal institution, but informal moving towards a formal institution. That transition is, uh, the transitional path is being demonstrated very differently from different countries. So I agree with your comments, and I hope it's useful for the, uh, for my comments on that. Thank you so much. And now we have a 20 minutes. I hope it is enough to is a very experienced advisor on writing. And you will have the job of writing the assignment right? Which is a deal on 18th of March. And today is what is the six? Yeah, So it counts as about 20% of the total score. So, in fact, the lecture in the seminar throughout already touch upon those things. So now, to from, uh, analytical academic angle to give you some advice. So our our stay here, So, uh, jointly answer your question, you may have and, uh, thank you.

SPEAKER 6
Good morning, everyone. Thank you, Professor. Um, mc Gang for inviting me to talk to you all about the first assignment. How are you going with it? Have you picked your country? Have you looked at the instructions carefully? No. Some? Yes. That's good. Well, this is an opportunity, um, to look at the instructions together, um, carefully and to ask any questions that you have. I probably won't have time in this session to go into the writing tips, which I was planning to go into, so we can always, um I can maybe come back for 15 minutes at another time. Do we have someone else coming in? This is No, This is for the written assignment. OK, so it's really important that you read the instructions really carefully because you need to understand the task and the scope of the task. Yeah. So let's have a break. The task down into the context, the first couple of sentences. Um, you've been given some information. OK, That helps to frame the question. So what is the context, the COVID-19 pandemic OK, which has severely disrupted and impacted on the process of economic development. As a result, developing countries are facing some unprecedented challenges in getting the process of development back on track. So that's the context. And there are two components to this assessment, the first one being that you have to identify the key challenges. OK, what are those challenges that developing countries are facing as a result of the pandemic? So you might be able to identify several, but at the end of the day, you choose one that is most relevant for your country. So the advice is to focus on one particular challenge. So you might acknowledge that there might be several challenges facing your country, but then you have to choose one. And but you also have to look at the implementation of policies in response to the challenge that you're going to be looking at. And not only that, but the constraints OK that the country has in implementing, um, those relevant policies. So if we were to break it down, there are really three key questions that you need to answer here. OK, The first one being What's the most significant challenge for your developing country in getting the economy back on track? Right Post pandemic. How well is your country and the second one is that your how well is your country developing country responding to right this challenge through the implementation of relevant policies or certain policies? The third question being about the constraints Well, what are those constraints to your developing country in implementing those policies? So what's constraining your developing country's response? Yeah, to the challenge. So if you haven't already done so hopefully by the end of this week, you would have settled on a country. OK, Now I advise that just don't in terms of your country selection, understand the issues first before you pick the country. Don't rush to pick a country because it happens to be your home country, for instance, right, because it could be more interesting to look at another country. But then you need to get informed before you can sit down to write, to sit down. To answer those questions and plan your answer. You need to understand what the issues are here. OK, so get informed. Do some research. Start with your co core readings and then do more focused research because as part of your research, you're going to try and identify the key challenges and what the different, Um, development strategies are OK amongst other things. And what you wanna be doing is getting that broader understanding, broader understanding of the literature on drivers of economic development, challenges to economic development, responses to to challenges to economic development. Right, So that then you can apply what you're learning in this course and through your research to the specific country case, do some brainstorming, mapping around that mind mapping. Is there a narrative here? How are you going to respond to the question? So you need to work out what you want to say. Overall. Now the gang has provided you with, um, 15 questions. OK, so please have a look at them. Don't get overwhelmed. The intention here is to ask a series of questions when you think about your country, which questions are relevant? What the questions allude to are possible challenges that maybe facing your country right? They're not intended for you to answer every question or to answer several questions. But for you to think about those three questions that I had in the other slide. Does that make sense? Yeah. So this is more sort of more background context, more getting to think about the issues that may be relevant to your country. Um, here are some extra questions to think about when it comes to, um, development strategies. OK, Now, Professor Lang has provided, um, a word document that sort of provides advice for how how to do well in this course. And you know the importance of being open minded and thinking critically asking questions. So it's important that whilst you do have these three key questions that you need to respond to in order to respond to those questions, you need to ask yourself, What do I What are the things I need to understand? First of all, OK, and so breaking it down further because what do we mean by development strategies, for instance, do you know what are the different types of development strategies right that developing countries can draw on how have development strategies been implemented in general? And what are the key lessons here in terms of development experiences of countries trying to implement certain strategies or policies and Why do we need to rethink the development strategies to reflect the changing conditions and environment in the 21st century? What's changed? OK, what's the what's changed or what's different? So here are some possible reasons for having to rethink development strategies or policies. Could it be that the, um, the goals of development are shifting? Could it be that there's a changing global environment? Could it be that there are shifting determinants of economic growth from tangibles to intangibles? Right. These questions should not be new, and in fact they should be familiar to you because they are drawn from the course. What about changing concepts of capital and capital accumulation? How about evolving relationship between the state and the market? Other reasons for rethinking development strategies include government interventions and policy reform. Right. How about trade orientation and industrial and innovation policy? Yes, this is the list. But again, what's relevant to your developing country, right? What's gonna be relevant for your developing country? You can't talk about everything, so you're gonna have to narrow it down. So yes, get informed. Right? So when you're reading, keep an open mind, make sure that you are covering different perspectives, because is there one or there are multiple perspectives here? OK, what are the different perspectives when it comes to factors or drivers of economic growth? For instance, the thing you want to ask yourself is, Is it the same for every developing country? Or the drivers are going to be different? And even if it is relevant for your developing countries country, is it going to be the same all the time? Or does it change too, right? The drivers? What can governments, What can your government do to foster economic growth to encourage economic growth and what factors affect policy strategies? Right again, these are questions for you to consider. But you should be thinking about these questions anyway as part of this course. And the reason why we're unpacking it like this is because you are having to apply what you are learning in this course to answering what seemingly looks like a very simple question or set of questions. You also have to get informed about, um, the COVID-19 pandemic right and in particular, its impact on economic development. So how has COVID-19 disrupted and impacted on the process of economic development for developing countries? right. And what has the impact been on policy strategies? And when you're getting informed and you're noticing that there are different perspectives, take note of where the authors are in agreement. OK, where is the consensus? Where is their disagreement, Right, And why can you explain the differences in the views? What accounts for the differences? Cos what you wanna move on from is not just simply summarising the literature, but being able to synthesise the literature, being able to say of the 10 readings that I've done, this is how I can group them. This is what I see in terms of of authors agreeing or disagreeing. By doing that, you can start to see perhaps key issues or themes that you can discuss. OK, ways of grouping the different readings so you can discuss them in a coherent way as part of your answer. So, any questions so far, C maybe, uh, let me

SPEAKER 1
have a question. I think the last point on a previous page is very important. Summarising to synthesising. This is a make a big difference in the quality of your writing. Lot of essays summarise The fact gave you the summary very good looks very rich. Show us you have done a lot of work, but it's a lack of synthesising that's actually distinguish you know, those quality of writing. Synthesising need a lot of more thinking when you learn things right. It's not just to summarise what, Actually, the fact you know, summarise you can do but the important thing to go the next step. So I just want to emphasise in that one.

SPEAKER 6
Thank you.
