SPEAKER 0
this material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University in accordance with section 113 P of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication maybe subject to copyright under the act any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice. We need a two independent courses right in a semester

SPEAKER 1
or two semester long courses, but we have only one hour or or less than two hours. So, uh, we won't give a kind of a due justice to, uh, to the subject. So that's therefore I think, for our concern is that we are learning the development. Economic and international trade is a or trade liberalisation is a part of a development strategy one way or another. So we need to understand how trade, you know, perform and importantly, affects the development outcome. So that's our concern. Right? So, uh, when I summarise the, uh, the key, uh uh, content. So there's a couple of places, you know, we are in the lecture. I think we should pay more attention to and especially, for example, when we have, uh, the doctrine of the so called comparative advantage. We know that if a developing country are focused on, you know, those a strategy of based on the comparative advantage, what will happen, what will happen that they were somehow being narrowly focused on producing a certain good right, and it's supposed to be based on their comparative advantage. But somehow, you know, because of the environment and, uh, because of the, uh, those kinds of industrial structure, in a way, diversification will be very important for the countries involved. So therefore, whether you know the there's a kind of a connection between, uh, follow the principle of comparative advantage but also follow the certain the so called industrial policy or whether the industrial policy, through the implementation that can somehow altered the basic pattern of comparative advantage and the plus not just the industrial policy per SE, but also a broader context of facilitating trade reform, institutional changes, but also on two fronts. Number one is on the human capital. You know, the, uh, education. The other one is the infrastructure. So for those economy, when they open wider on trade and investment for laws, you know, knowledge learning by doing all these things. But we don't really matched with the, uh, with a proper, you know, those are public policy and, uh, in terms of infrastructure and education and human capital. And, uh, then you won't have a very, uh, very, uh, very, very good outcome for the trade liberalisation. So the package is that the policy is a combined. So in this lecture, we we deal with these two things, right? So let me just give you a bit of review about the trade first, right? So we talk about, uh, the the good thing about free trade. That's the principle, right? I myself also, uh, you know, through the, uh you know, the other degrees is to focus more on international trade. And, uh, so we believe, you know, the free trade principles are very powerful because those are principle underlying the so-called regional and the global multilateral trade liberalisation. We know those principles. There's no way you know where the community can come up with the idea of a free trade. Non discrimination, most favourite nation trading. Uh, you know, stages of the WTO. So all these things are based on the principle of free trade. But however we know the reality in today's seminar, I'm going to talk about the the globalisation, right? Why? When the theory, you know, are there, You know, in fact, in the older textbook, in all the lectures on international trade in the Department of Economics globally, this kind of a free trade principle are still there for the purpose of teaching or for students to understand. Uh, you know those kind of ideas Where are those are free trade ideas are coming from how the theories evolved over time from the classical effect before the classical economics on free on trade, we can trace this back to further right the mercantilist, the views In the lecture we mentioned that one, then the classical and the neuro classical and to the modern trade theory and why, you know, the theories are evolving over time and but importantly keep in mind and we are dealing with the development issue, right? So with all the theories and how those theories are impacting on the basic thinking of decision makers, right in developing countries, why, when you have a free trade principle, also highlighting the gains from trade. At the same time, all the countries right develop and developing now also result to the certain protection measure. So what are the argument for those trade protection? The policies, right. And, uh uh, under the free trade it make it is a very difficult because of the WTO the requirement. But now, in the process of AD globalisation, we can see so many countries don't resort to the protection is the measure. But for students who are learning international trade in the context of development, we need to answer this question. The question is that whether those policy rather put protective or restrictive policy, we answer the question. Are they, uh are they working or can they work effectively working effectively throughout the time and but the weather? Eventually this kind of a policy will come to some kind of, uh, adjustment and readjustment. So we need to answer that question. Why? Why? The question is important, because if if you pursue pursuing certain policy, which is not a theoretically a kind of a justifiable and we know there is, some mistakes can be made right, Those mistakes, probably. We can see basically is a is a is a distortionary in terms of the, uh, incentive right and to market competition, for example. So why you have lots of distortions Eventually country will suffer because you pay the economic cost. Those policy can lead to a massive waste and inefficiency. Right. But for the I mean for the reason because, you know, everyone is doing that one. So you also like to to do it. But at the same time, you know, there can you know, MI mistakes can be made so we can talk about that one later on, which is, I think is interesting because it's so relevant, right? Including Australia. Now, the policy debate is the same thing about whether you know, the main in Australia perhaps versus on more on free trade. It's the same thing many other countries doing the same thing. But anyway, and, uh, we can, uh, come to that one, a bit later on. Now, the pattern of trade so very briefly about, uh, those those you know, the pattern of trade because of that pattern of trade changes over time also resulting from one from you know, the evolution of a theory because the theory has to make a certain adjustment right in a way to really try to explain what's actually going on in the real world. Now, for example, we have, uh, the so called the inter industry trade versus industry trade and increasingly to the so called the fragmentation of the global value chain. And all this is but increasingly, even further now, a lot of trading is not actually trading goods, right? They are trading services, and the services is not somehow driven by so much about the natural resources. For example, land and minerals, right is basically driven by one for those intangible capitals, right? Those Internet kind of a thing with with all these changes, we can see the theory of also changing back to the inter industry trade. And this is all my, my, uh, my PhD thesis actually working on that one. So, uh, on the on the inter industry trade and being captured by the theory of a hea earning and he early is a very powerful theory in a way. And, uh, of course, later on, the theory being theorised and through paulsson. So the theory is called not just HO but H OS right? It's very powerful, very logical and presenting is especially very suitable in understanding the, uh, the concept of comparative advantage. But those theory, uh, the the the trade is basically referring to the pattern of trade, while countries are based on their comparative advantage, treating the goods they produce most efficiently and the import of goods which they are producing less efficiently. So when country, uh, all the countries are do that way, the older country will enjoy the comparative advantage or the benefit from the comparative advantage. And I didn't go through because there's a chart. There is basically through the relative prices changes. And, uh, but however increasingly we can see the high earning. And, uh, the theory explained only about, uh, very little, you know relative, you know, small proportion of a trade of actual trade, something like a 30% and no more than 40%. Increasingly, and scholars are including Australian scholars from, uh, University of Melbourne and a UE. Eventually they find that no, you can see the trade pattern is also changing. It's not so much about the inter industry trade going on between countries, but it's the intra industry trade. Meaning what? Countries? Not just exporting a certain goods which you know they produce well and import Those are they don't produce well. But now the pattern of trade is happening between countries basically trading the similar goods Japan export automobile to US US also export automobile to Japan. So the hea earning are not be able to, you know, to give a proper explanation to that development because, uh, they not based on the, you know, those kind of a fact do, Even though scholars, uh, again is from, uh, from a EU. But he he he left, uh, later on and now return to to to Australia. Now his name is, uh is, uh, road for his, uh, his theory is that again? Still follow the pattern of, you know, comparative advantage, going much deeper and analysing the pattern of intra industry trade. So if you look at the the textbook of international economic, um, on part of trade, his name and the theories there, and it's not so popular nowadays, But I think at that stage, he, uh, he's doing so well in, uh, in in getting theory. So, uh, I did a trade theory under his teaching in in CBE and also the theory of protection Two separate courses. I still remember there's only three students in that group. He was so tough. And, uh, so, uh, a very few students, but, uh, I. I learned a lot from him. He went to the Nottingham University in UK and back to the, uh, the Bond University, Uh, in in Gold Coast. Anyway, So, uh, so that's, uh you have to try to find a theory to explain that the intra industry, right? So intra industry again, you know, is just, uh you know, Peter Lloyd from the University of Melbourne and, uh, all the older generation of Australian scholars you know, to identify and working towards, you know, explaining the inter industry and then the theory start emerging about the economy of a skill. And, uh, and the economy of skill is happening and and enjoy That one is also on the consumption side. To say that the love of varieties those kind of a theory to explain on the on the consumption side about the demanding. For example, consumers are demanding different type of cars, Ra rather than just a car, right So therefore, you know those producers to try to satisfy the consumer preferences in a way to produce the variety of different goods and to see the consumer taste those kind of theory. And eventually perhaps, uh, we can see the new pattern, uh, are emerging, which is the, uh is the fragmentation. And it's not a country producing the the final goods and then treated its final goods. They actually producing a part of that goods, right? And the past and the before, the final products are being produced. And, uh, a lot of the things happening across the border to trade but treating the components. So component trade has become so popular and increasingly, and then you can see the, uh, at the 1st 1st time, we are kind of facing the reality that, uh, we do have a theory explaining the component, the trade of fragmentation. We don't have a theory, and, uh, and then some. The big scholars are saying that, you know, in order to explain those phenomena, we need a a bit of everything classical, neo classical, modern series, a bit of everything to explain. So which is not satisfactory. So in a way, I think more than 10 years ago we wrote a paper on that one predicting perhaps on the track. Maybe some kind of a new theory will be emerging, but we haven't seen that yet. And and then you can see there are another pattern of trade, which is the intangible capital in determining the pattern of trade is also emerging. Anyway, the the the, uh, the, uh the idea is to show you that, uh, the patter of trade are changing. But how Developing country are coping with that change. And, uh, you know, do we expect the developing country just based on, you know, comparative advantage to producing the goods narrowly focused and supposed to be, you know, follow their comparative advantage, And then at the same time, you can see those products somehow subject to the fluctuations of, uh, of international market. So the prices of their goods being produced are not, uh are not, uh, you know, selling well in a way. But in fact, the price can be, you know, deteriorating over time. So this is a phenomenon what we refer to Can you tell me quickly when they are exporting? Prices are depreciating, right? Oh, sorry. They are, you know, being, uh, being, uh being, uh reduced. So what is the phenomenon? What is the concept? We can refer to this phenomenon as compared with their import prices. This way you should know, right? When? When, For example, when developing countries are focused on, you know, labour in agricultural product and export. Also pro product. The price of agriculture on the global market. They tend to be lower and and and lower. What is the phenomenon? What is the concept we use to describe this kind of a phenomenon? You should know that one I. I think I mentioned that before when the country's export prices were compared with the import prices are changing coming, becoming lower and lower. What will happen to this country? They suffer from what balance of trade is comes later. But what is the, uh, sorry? Yeah, OK, Anyway, I'm sure you know that one. I mentioned that, uh, several times. That's excellent. It's the terms of trade. So the terms of trade of a country will be deteriorating all the time. Then the developing countries, well, while doing based on the comparative advantage. But somehow we suffer because the terms of trade deteriorated is a real source of the sufferer of, uh, of the the welfare, the income. And so for those countries, somehow they need to thinking about what, thinking about the so called strategy of diversifying their industrial structure to to somehow, you know, to, uh, to minimise those cost. And, uh so that's a This is a struggling if you are, listen to the recorded lecture. We know that, uh, the primary industry, agricultural resources, certain resources there, terms of trade actually deteriorating over time and, uh, in the in the past 100 years by 0.5 you know, every year. So which again is a is A is a real suffer. Why? Because if you have a deterioration of terms of trade, so what do you do? You have to You have to produce extra, more quantity of a of A product to be able to exchange the certain, uh, level of quantity of input, more efforts, more production purely because it's not because of your producing goods inefficiently. Is it because of what is it because of the international market? If the goods are not selling well, the goods are not selling Well, why is that? Is it because the big player you know, the the great, you know, agricultural producer in the world? EU United States, Canada, Australia. In a way, there's a massive production in agricultural sector, so therefore, the goods tend to be sold relative cheaply in the international market. So developing countries are suffering as a result. So that's a one way of doing that one. So when I come to to, you know, to try to link what we have learned is about, uh, the policy. We can see that, uh, policy may not be working very well in a way because import substitution can produce a very, very inefficient outcome. But on the other hand, if the policy, there's a certain element of that policy which you can use in, uh, in alter the the so called the factory do if you can do you can you can do that successfully. That means that you can alter the pattern of industrialization because, uh, previously is a rather rigid right. You know, that's a labour is your comparative vendor. You produce labour intensive goods and agriculture. The land is a comparative when you produce a land intensive good. But now, because of the diversification or the efforts, you know, producing the human capital, for example, right, And also the way of finding more capital to develop the capital intensive goods and then the industrial structure tend to be diversified in a way. But the push for that one is that, uh is the government of policy. So this is the theory by, uh, very famously now by, uh, Professor Justin Lin from, uh, Peking University. He used to be the vice president and the chief economist of the World Bank. And, uh, so after, you know, serving there for four years, travelling to more than 80 countries in the world, he suddenly realised No, you know, strictly follow the comparative advantage. Well, in principle, it's very soft. But however, in reality, you won't give developed countries so much room for further development. So now he's an advisor to several Africa, uh, Africa countries, the government, right? I was in his office. He said, You look at the the other worlds we can see there are several photos. The president of, uh, Africa countries are shaking hands with him, so he's providing those advice. Then he developed the theory. The theory, of course. New structure, economics, which is somehow it. We know it's a It's not a kind of a confusing in a way, because in the in the standard textbook, we have a very, uh, clear cut. Uh, theory and the policy prescriptions. Clear cut is a free trade and versus, uh, the trade protection in a way. But the new structure economic actually highlighting. You know, there's a certain room for government to do in a way to actually to create or to alter the pattern of a comparative advantage and to your advantage. So, uh, and he used always use china as an example. Right? And you can see the, uh, you know, the catching up the speed is is is amazing, right? You just only 40 years ago. You know, countries are so much rely on the, uh, the exporting of, uh, of, uh, of oil and some kind of agricultural product. And, uh, but later on, when the, uh when open door policy, uh, implemented and you can see there's a massive labour intensive goods being produced continuously and to the, uh, another two decades and then moving very quickly towards producing capital intensive and now is increasingly and producing the technological intensive. And and then, you know, you can see the the going green, and, uh, and the energy transformation gave the country another opportunity to actually, you know, develop the new industry. So those things behind that one, you can see so not just the invisible hand, you know, working there, but also some kind of a visible hand being implemented by government in terms of, uh, you know, R and D, for example, in in terms of, uh, you know, the, uh, information R and D and also the institution, uh, building, like intellectual property, right protection And all these things are going on. It's not perfect, but it's, uh it's, uh, you can see there's always there. And, uh and, uh, moving forward. So this is just an example to show that, uh, you know, I in fact, I jumped a bit and I should, you know, move back to talking about this. Uh uh. We'll come back to that one. When I summarise because this is important, it's not a very clear cut, right? Yes or no. On a certain policy, there's a subtle issues right policy can be implemented in certain way in producing a more conducive outcome in terms of, uh, the industrialization. Now, I think conceptually in the lectures, uh, very importantly for you to be able to understand, you know, the gains from trade, right? This is, uh, conceptually, uh, we are We are ask you to, you know, to to address those questions. And, uh, the the gains from A from A trade is not just a static, right? Very importantly, the gain from trade, it can be in a dynamic form. And this is the precisely on the dynamic form of gains of trade actually allows a certain country, for example, the East Asia growth model. Very, uh, you know, vividly demonstrated using those kind of a strategy, right, Going, uh, continuously in the dynamic. So what are they? You know, those things are government in a position to have a policy of trade liberalisation, and after trade being liberalised, you can see the the flow of, uh, trade, uh, goods. But the flow of, uh, you know, factor of production and then increasingly, to the flow of ideas. And, uh, so give a country, uh, very unique position right to to utilising their comparative advantage and pushing for trade and the learning by doing, for example, you know, technological idea, the transfer ideas, uh, transfer all these things being a dynamic, you know, the gains from trade. So, uh, so, in a sense, I mean, when you argue about a free trade, this is the the idea, right? To look at the dynamic change dynamic again from trade. So, uh, and perhaps also organise the data utilising certain countries. Uh, the idea when you have this dynamic gain is a bit different from the the static one in the way. That means that as all the things that I mentioned about the government policy can play a very important role. Right. Let me repeat. You know, uh, trade, uh, opening, which basically, you have to have a policy put in place which liberalise the trade. And then you can see that when you liberalise the trade you, you, you, you you believe that that can deliver a good outcome. But at the same time, what sort of adjustment will take place? This is what we call the adjustment. Cost adjustment costs can be tremendous, but at the same time. You can see that is perhaps the pushing for that one. You know, many countries experience, you know, so that they act they can actually adjust, adjust to the adjustment cost. Uh, quite well, by getting the policy right. So liberalisation following the sequencing and then, you know, the continue to to to grow. And so those kind of a policy, uh uh, play a very, very important role. And, uh, that's a part of that one. And, uh, I, I think that is, uh the lecture is, uh, is not an update in a way to look at, uh, you know, new pattern of trade. Uh, that's why I, I think this, uh uh, in the previous seminars when we talk about the digital divide, for example. Yeah, a lot of things actually have a trade dimension to it. Meaning what? Because the pattern of trade now is being driven by many new factors. Right? Intangible capital is a part of that one. So therefore, for developing countries, whether they should just follow passively the pattern of change continuously from now on, and like what happened in the past, right? Uh, Asian needs follow the path of Japan and then Asean follow the pattern of Asian needs and China and now South Asia again following the pattern of ASEAN. And so those are continues to until basically now. But now we are facing the so called this is the imperative of the new industrialization. So countries have to be making themselves a very adaptive to the new requirement. And, uh, so intangible capital is a part of that story. So, in a sense, there is, of course, the going with the grain, right? Eventually, perhaps, you know, EU now start doing that one. They are imposing tariffs. The tariff is on one on those goods which are being produced using the very massively with the with the emission. Uh uh, with, uh, with the car emission intensive, uh, goods. So once you know those kind of a policy being put in place following the old way of industrialization, it won't work because they will put you in a very disadvantaged position previously, you know, because we know that the carbon leakage did we mention about that one. So developed countries industry are shifting towards the developing country, so therefore the pollution goes with it. But now you know this, Uh, you know, it's very difficult. You cannot just produce the P. You know, the poll pollution, the emission intensive goods. Well, assume everything else is the same. So you export those goods to the developing countries, developed countries no longer in. Increasingly, they were imposing those kind of restrictions on the goods, of course, or take some time to go through. But so but for the later commerce, that challenges are real. So you have to think about how you know to catch up with a new pattern of trade and and the component trade is a part of that story and the so called the global value chain. And there is also a theory about that. What sort of theory we can use in explaining that, Uh, you know, the global value chain. And, uh, I think in most cases they still use the comparative advantage. Right? So you basically compare the two things right for a country on average to produce a goose as a whole, the whole goods, right? And based on a certain comparative advantage, as compared with the situation where this country, you know, mobilising their resources in producing only in part of that. Good. So tell me, which way of going you know, uh, strategy we are producing is the more conducive for the developing country producing the whole goods or the requirement right? Or producing only the part of that good or which is relatively easier to mobilise the resources in producing the whole goods is the whole factory, right? Is the whole thing set up? You have to get everything organised to be able to do it. But however, if you just allow or taking advantage in producing just one part of the good, it will be a lot easier, right? So that means that the developing country can fully fully utilising their comparative advantage in producing parts of that one. So that's why the global value chain become so popular. Right? And that's why you know so many developing countries involved in the global value chain, because it's a relatively easy for them to handle, as compared with, you know, the producing the whole goods. So this is the one. it's a bit of unfortunate because of the covid and the covid crisis actually disrupt those kind of a global supply chain. The value chain a lot. Now you know where the community is Still in the process of, you know, recurring from those disruptions. But, uh, again at those junction of the time many countries in the world whether we go there, you know, doing the past. And, uh Or, uh let's try to do the things ourselves. You know, this is the the idea. It is related to the second part of the of trade theory in this course, which is about the trade protection. Right. So the protection is always there, and, uh, there's a in the in, the in the lectures we mentioned about the infant industry, right? Why is the infant industry uh, argument is A is a is a, you know, is is rather so because all the later commerce when you have just started building their industrial base you know, you you basically are facing the competition from, uh, those jet, right? Those a big company globally. How come the the domes firm can survive? So the infant industry protection is a part of that, you know, consideration. Let's protect when they are infant, right? It was small and young, and, uh, but when they grow up, just let them go right. But however those policy those policy once you put in place, they tend to protect the infant industry almost like a forever, because it's very difficult when once they are being protected. You know, you allow the firms to, uh, to survive or independently, so it will be very difficult. So those are the argument, right? The infant industry being protected and then continue, you know, through the protection. You have a lot of this kind of a connection between government and the firm and a lot of inefficiency, lot of informality and, uh, being getting involved. So eventually you are facing the global market. The competition, right. So therefore the cost effective those measures will become very important because the global market, the price for the goods is not being determined by the domestic supply and demand. It's being driven and determined by the international, on average, right? So in that case, if you are not running efficiently, how come the industry you produce all the products you produce can survive those competition? So even though they may satisfy certain consideration that you know during the crisis, better produce the goods and, uh, by themselves rather than producing everything. And, uh, so this kind of a debate and, uh, going on until basically now crisis that makes things worse. But somehow getting the policy right, especially by getting the thinking of those policies right, is important. And, uh, anyway, so that's another dimension. But a theory of protection, uh, touch upon so many other dimension and, uh, used to be CBE A. You have a separate car. I don't know whether CBE still have that one. The theory of protection, Trade protection? Probably not. And, uh, this, uh, but quite useful in a way. And, uh, the textbook is, uh, written by a professor, uh, Neil Boston. He he passed away later on, but the his, uh, protection theories become very powerful. And, uh, but anyway, that's another one. I think towards the end of the lecture, we do have this, uh uh, another things to cover, right. This is about a fluctuation of the price, and we can see the argument from developing countries. It's not just a free trade, per SE, but a fair trade, right? So being treated more fairly by the international, Uh, especially those, uh, I think there's a data about the agricultural protection in North America, but also the protection in European Union. And, uh so what developing countries are facing those competitions and this fair trade? Uh, anyway, so those are the you can refer to the key, uh, elements, uh, in the lectures. So, uh, let me move to the seminars because, uh, all the things we discussed about the free trade about the protection about impulse substitution is all very relevant to see what happened. Since 2012. Since 2012, global is undergoing a very important structural changes previous before that one, we can still see the free trade. Globalisation going on seems to be OK, But after that more than 12 years ago, you know, we can see that the the globalisation that forces set in And, uh, previously so many developing countries, especially East Asia, so beneficial with a very conducive international environment, right? So therefore their trade strategy or the strategy of integration working so well because that the environment is rather conducive, Right? But when you don't have this globalisation, you know, get And the WTO, as a global institution are working now, the developing country are even facing more challenges, right? So that's the situation we are going to to discuss on the on the de globalisation and how that impact. So, uh, here I raised a few questions for you to think about Number one. What does a de globalisation mean? Right, So, uh, I think your generation younger generation is so familiar with the concept of a globalisation. Right, But the DEG global, you know, it's not that familiar, even though it's happening already. So what? What? The historical precedents for the globalisation is on the new. And then in the previous, uh uh, you know, the history we see there's a certain period of, uh, deg globalisation and, uh, causing an enormous, you know, very, very negative. And the outcome globalisation and the DEG globalisation. What are the implications for economic development? So that's the question that we need to ask because that is relevant. We're not just talking about a global, there is AD global. There is a per E even though they are very big topic. And, uh, but we are talking about, uh, the relevance, the implications for developing countries. So is the multilateral approach towards the Reg and still feasible. So that's the question right. I ask, is that feasible? Or can we take a kind of a step by step approach to Reg Globalise or reintegration? Carry out the R integration? Is that feasible? And, uh, right now, you know, a lot of views being expressed saying that in fact, the globalisation is a dead, and, uh, so I don't believe that one. I think it is. Perhaps, uh, you know, this, uh, probably in the in the transition thing. So in the long run, perhaps you can see. But you need to argue, right? You need to argue and and why It is a feasible and, uh, what sort of approach And the global? Uh uh uh, you know, the the members, Uh uh of a global community. Uh, you know, uh, in, uh, is adopting. So we the regional approach towards the reintegration work. We have so many right in the article, uh, we published last year, is on water now, and about the future of multilateralism. Right? We can see there's a data to show you the FTAS, the regional groupings. The numbers are increasing tremendously right in hundreds. And now previously this is only a few. But why is that. Why countries, you know, so, uh, determined to To get involved in a regional approach, but still hope that, uh, you know, regional economical Cooper will work even though the multilateral multilateralism the WTO is a weakening is weakening tremendously. And, uh, the typical example right now is the dispute settlement. Right? There is a judge there, but there is no one now to actually make those judgments and settle those dispute. So where the original approach is working, what are the policy choices for developing countries in managing trade and investment liberalisation over the topic? Remember, when I talk about the East Asian growth model, So we know at the time, right, those countries actually engaging rather actively in liberalising their trade, right? Not just that, you know, they are the trade, but also open the door to foreign capital. And, of course, later on, you know those kind of learning by doing order. But now the question is that when you have a rather worsening international environment, right, you can You can call this a de globalisation. Now you need to ask the question. What policy choices do we still recommend for developing country to be more actively engaging in trade liberalisation or not, or capital liberalisation. So those kind of issues are real issue. And remember, in similar one, when we talk about the rethinking development strategy at that time, I think we will touch upon those kind of a harsh environment that actually is is a real kind of a challenge facing developing country. You do it or not, do it. Oh, of course. We were told that in the past, many countries in the past they are doing very successfully. East Asian growth model ASEAN integration, etcetera are working very well. But now, with a background of a nation weather developing countries, especially the later whether they still need to do it or not, and and how so this is the issue is we don't have a very clear answer because they are is unfolding now and a lot of confusion about, uh, you know, trade liberalisation and the capital account liberalisation and et cetera. But, uh, but I think for the students of learning the development economics is a is a very kind of a powerful message. Here, right is to get a kind of a conceptual framework, right? Not just the policy per SE policy discussion can go this way and that way and particularly, you know, different time and a different stage of development. But somehow I think for those, uh, policy setting or the policy information that you know implementation, you do need some kind of a theory as a kind of a guiding principles behind the policy. If you don't have this theory getting theory right, what will happen? We were being drifted along when the tide is changing in this way, we follow the tide, right When the tide is changing later on, you know, we follow in into a moving into another direction, which is very wrong because it's very costly. As I mentioned earlier on, if you made a mistake right in terms of a development strategy, you you you wouldn't say that those kind of economic principles are working. It's not being driven by the politician in a way or ideological thinking its economic, economic, the law of economic. They are working in a particular way. So if you want to violate in a way, to come up with the so called strategy seems to be handy, especially in responding to what happened to the crisis. Then perhaps we will suffer economically when we suffer economically, you can see that, Uh, it proved to be wrong in terms of those policy. So what do you do? You rectify right? But rectify those wrong policy and strategy were very costly as well. So it's time consuming, etcetera. Anyway, so I think the key message in answering those questions is that to get the theory right, right in thinking, even though that theory is not complete in many cases, it's not a consistent in a way. And, uh so But again, that's the is the is the complex, uh uh, situation. Now what does the de globalisation mean? So Well, I just take the standard text. Uh, you know, the standard definition Delo is the process of diminishing interdependence and integration between certain units around the world. Basically, it country, right. It is widely used to describe the period of history when economic trade and investment between countries that decline before that one we will see is, uh is, uh, uh, rising It is stand in contrast to global donation, in which units of countries have become increasingly integrated over time and generally spends the time between a period of a global donation. That's interesting. So talking about a global relation, a deg global relation we're not thinking about something happen in a historical sense that can go on forever because the recent history already show us. No, they are not. We do have experience of a de globalisation before, basically, you can guess now and from 1918, 1945. And that's the legal globalisation. Two great wars in between of great depression, right? And it's happening over that short span of time. But we do have a global donation previously basically from 1870 to 1914 before the World War one. So those are kind of a rather relative free flow of, uh, of, uh of goods and etcetera. But some of you are see that? Well, because of that is not a true globalisation because, uh, uh, uh over that period is basically very, very strong. The Western power, You know that in terms of colonialization, they want to maintain those kind of, uh, good order in terms of trading. But there's also bad things happening in that period. You are talking about the the the the slave trade and all these negative things, right, so, you know, try to understand. But this is a relatively right, but 1945 2nd after Second World War, we know the brand wood system allowed a new global that had taken place in terms of trade. We have a G tariffs and and the WTO later on. And suddenly you can see this is actually our generation. Your generation is actually watching something happening in a very fundamental way, right? And, uh so that's the the interdependent and integration between countries are worsening. And the worsening is not just the trade and investment, but also reflecting the underlying institution, which is WTO is also weakening over time. So that's the situation. And, uh, that's the situation. The chance I would probably don't have time to go through in the detail is very simple. You have a growth of trade, global trade and growth of global GDP. When you compare this to you can see the blue lines, which is the, uh which the world trade growth, right, on average since 19 nineties, always above the global GDP growth. Right, the red, which is the red. But increasingly you can see it's actually, uh, the blue one, you know, up and down global financial crisis have, uh, you know, impact on the trade. And then after that, I remember this 2012, right? So for a certain period global trade, the growth rate is actually lower than global GDP growth rate. And, uh, affect the covid as even more so because the trade is a shut down the lockdown and all these things happening. So another shock to the global, uh, trading system. So that's the situation. I have another chart later on to say that, uh, you know, if we follow, you know, the the the things, uh, business are the normal. Those are scenario we can see. Uh, there's a certain trend, future trend. But if we can actually come up with the policy which the policy has become a more conducive to global trade, we can see the situation are very different. All right, so that comes later about, uh, now, why would a historical Why would a historical president I already mentioned? So I won't go through that one. And this is a terrible situation. Uh, between 1914 and 1955 45. Right? Great depression is all happening right, Because at that time, you know, countries are the thinking, especially Europe is thinking about, uh well, the policy, uh, sort of protection is actually good for their own economy. A lot of things out of, uh, of domestic political consideration, right? And, uh, so they just try to protect. And at the same time, you know, they worsen the situation of trade. So eventually, you can see that, uh, you know it causing tremendous, uh, problem. So here is not a we can separate out the war, right? With, uh, economic policy. That's the example. Right? So the the war, the conflict can actually resulting from a wrong policy and those wrong policies Not so much about the trade, but also about other things as well. And a typical example again using the the terms of trade concept. And, uh, it's about, uh, you know, the the what happened to Germany right after the first World War. So because of the the repre Germany have to Germany has to pay the war, right? The price right. But what? Using what they have to produce, right, they have to produce. They have to export in order to earn the foreign exchange and pay pay for their defeat. Right? But however, at that time, you know when they even though, you know, France and certain Army right to occupy in the, uh, the the, uh, industrial area to to monitor and and force the workers to work hard. And, uh, at that time the John Key was in that No, it's not a wrong. It's It's not a good policy because that the policy can trigger the backlash. Why he using the the terms of trade, the one we just mentioned, right? If the Germany being if the German being forced to produce an export, that means that their export prices will be will be be lower, right, because of massive production. So if the terms of trade will be deterioration, where be the country will suffer tremendously even though you know it's under the the, uh, the, uh, those kind of agreement. So Ken was said, No, it's not a way to go. He got a warning of that one. But of course, you know, they didn't follow that. Eventually, you know, rise of the Hitler and all these things and the backlash is happening. And behind that one is the economic laws is the economic theories in a way. So by doing so, you can see the and then every country try to protect themselves in a way. And, uh, again every country suffer. And then the conflict can be resolved there, not just the of course, depression in between. Right? 29. 33. There's a lot of, uh uh the historical discussions, you know, over this, uh, over over this period. And, uh, but what happened in after 1945 is a tremendous right, very good story about the globalisation and backed by the, you know, the institutional changes get and the WTO. But now it's again it it's awakening. It's awakening. But lot of fundamentals are not, you know, remain unchanged. Those are fundamental in terms of trade. Uh, pattern. The theory is all still relevant for that one. Now, what are the implications for for developing countries as the global de globalisation? So there's a data to show that how the low income countries are manufacturing export as a percentage of total exports are increasing over that period because the global nation, but also a major explanation of the manufacturing export expansion is the reduction in the protection, especially in industries, as a part of a global production network which has allowed a number of developing countries to move up the value added ladder. Well, if you have, uh, only the final goods being produced, right import and export it you're trying to protect right through tariffs. But once you have a industrial sorry, the the the global production network, that means you don't easily produce, you know, impose a tariff on on the path, right? And are you following me? That, uh, tariffs on goods and the tariffs on part? Ok, tariffs on goods means what exactly? Perhaps to some extent, you can protect your own industry, right? Because the goods are competing with the domestically produced goods. But however, if you are imposing tariffs on part, it is good or not. Good, good or not, good components components will be utilised in domestic setting. Right. So if you're imposing tariffs, it's not good. It's good or not good. No, it's not good is not good in terms of the effective rate of protection you can calculate. And, uh, you know, the value added the things you produce. If you are the government imposing tariffs on components or the part or the imported raw material Being utilised for domestic setting is not good because it's very simple because it increase the cost of production of domestic farm. Right, so it's not good. So that's why the GP N, the global production network, allows the further reduction of tariffs. If more patents are driven by the GP N, then the countries have a relatively low protection on that one. So it will be good. So many developing countries, as I mentioned earlier on they get involved, right. They get involved to to to their benefit. Because, remember, compared with the producing the whole goods as compared with the producing a part is relatively easy right to produce the part At the same time, the global, you know, those kind of a network allows countries to lower the product. Sorry, the tariffs are those are good. So to facilitate those kind of, uh, the, uh the, uh, the trade, Uh, and the production. And of course, you know, the the COVID is a very, uh, this is really external shock. In a way, it's shock to the the supply chain, the value chain, and they disrupted. And all these other things is, uh, now is, uh, you know, recurring a bit And in fact, in some areas recurring quite quite rapidly. Shipping, for example, during the covid crisis is all down. Right. But now the global shipping, you know, the trade is actually picking up. Uh uh, quite robustly. So for those things, uh, again, the sentiments change a bit, right? That's why many countries let's produce the goods ourselves rather than IUT. And, uh, this is a violation of the principle of a comparative advantage. Why is that? If everyone producing the goods themselves this we are back to what, well, back into the kind of a attack, in a way, right. No need for trade for trading, no need. Everyone produces all the things that is impossible. The answer to that one is almost like, impossible. So of course, this is the question about the picking winners, right? That means the government can pick, kind of identify certain industry, certain company doing a good job, providing all the subsidies and the protection, so to encourage to grow. But again, that's also against the free trade principle. In a way, those strategy will be very costly economically down the track. So now I think you will be in a position to actually make some kind of an argument in a way. And so for those students who are writing an essay on this topic, I really encourage you to not just, uh, using. Very, uh, you know, the traditional established the theory, etcetera. But look at what happened now similar to what you wrote on the region assignment, right? Actually, the current challenge and how to deal with the challenges so on trade is I think it's a very it's very promising. It's very promising writing, uh, facing the challenges and providing analysis, but also assessment right about their policy pros and cons. A wider policy for Malaysia is a shifting because, as I mentioned, the environmental is not conducive deg global et. But even under that situation, whether the developing countries should somehow following certain principles right certain theories which probably guide that policy in the moving towards in the right direction rather than the wrong direction. Anyway, that's another point. So global division can be beneficial for developed countries as well. Why is that? Because it's GP N, right? So US companies were able to reduce the cost of a computer te uh, communication equipment by about 10 to 30% by making equipment in facts around the world at least, the US economic growth by 0.3% point a year between 95 2002. This is an old study that shows that, uh, you know, developed country is the same the benefit. It benefit tremendously from a free free trade in a way, but also from those kind of, uh, the, uh the, uh, the new pattern of trade right global global value chain. And so now, whether with against the background of a de globalisation, whether the multilateral approach towards Reg globalisation will work now, the fragmentation this is from another study of the global trading system and an equal gains in bilateral trade agreement are the source of both the global inefficiencies and inequities. Overcoming this situation requires reactivating the political process. This is a very powerful message. That means we can do through other means, right in a way. But most efficient way is still to reactivating the WO process, which is now very, very much down so But again, that also need a global effort, right? And given this kind of a decoupling and deris and, uh, the the policy based on those, uh, you know, policies, uh, it seems to be it's not a reintegration greeting, but actually further disintegrating the rising regional economic groupings. And the possible impact on the government is a big topic because the the sub regional grouping and the bilateral agreement is all happening. Australia and China, for example, they sign a bilateral free trade agreement. And in 2015 now, the nine years is the past, Right? You can see that, Uh, you know, of course, in between, there's, uh, tensions, right? Uh uh, political tensions, et cetera. But trading continues bilaterally in in a massive way. So, uh, that again, You know, you can see this is just an example about the bilateral. But now we can also make assessment about, uh, the regional, right. R, CE P and the CPTPP is all have a very high standard, right? Especially CPTPP have a very high standard. You have to meet that requirement to be able to to be part of that, uh, you know, the, uh, groupings and those standards in many areas is actually higher than what WTO is required. So in that sense, if they are working well and, uh, you know, the ASEAN plus three ASEAN plus one, those kind of a regional grouping. And, uh and also there's also the mechanism for Northeast Asia involving Japan, Korea and China and, uh, uh, read news yesterday. Perhaps there's a resume that Northeast Asia leaders are meeting as soon as this month. So those things are reflecting because the economy, the globalisation, actually makes things worse. Because, uh, you know, previously countries can exporting all of the crisis, right, East Asia and all these things. But now you know, it's so kind of uh So, uh, everything is so down, right in a way. And the countries like Korea and Japan used to be very export oriented economy running tremendous trade surplus. But now they are all running trade. Deficit it. How come? How come so something wrong with the, uh with the setting. So therefore, they also requires those countries to actually to push for the, uh, the new changes, uh, through that one. So that's why the important role of WTO in reintegrating the global economy and the incredible success of trade in support of productivity growth and frequently poverty reduction is now under serious threat. This is, everyone knows, right, because the WTO actually offer those kind of gains, right? So productivity growth, so only a return to guide it. Multilateralism under the leadership of the WTO, where place all participants on a level playing field, including developing country, and help the least advantaged country achieve competitiveness and drive again from trade. Now the final sentence here is very much related to what I reviewed about the cost content pattern of trade gains from trade static and dynamic, but also gaining through even though it's a complex environment but gaining the competitiveness for developing country. All the things that I mentioned you know in in in the in the lectures is actually relevant, including the policy, like a new structure economy in terms of a new strategy of creating or altering. You know, the comparative advantage will be all very relevant in a way. But, uh, again, the article opposed on the water if you about the future of multilateralism is basically follow this kind of a change right to say, uh, using the game theoretical framework to see how we can actually to turn around those kind of tide in a way to reinforcing the reinforcing forces for WTO rather than continue to have a to have a forces undermining the WTO. But, uh, turning into reinforcing where requires the, you know, the participation by by all And of course, the leadership is important. But if everyone are, you know, working towards some kind of import substitution and, uh and believe that, uh, those kind of a policy will be working in their own interest, there's no way you can come up with a consensus, right? You see that in recognising the importance of, uh, of this message only a return to guided multilateralism and place all participants on a level playing Well, this is I think it is a very profound. So I want to get that message across to you about that one. And, uh, this one. I already touched upon that one so I won't go through the proliferation of inward looking. It's inward looking, but it also can be an open and open ended. Right. So it's it's called a, uh, professor uh, Peter D dress here, and the Professor Ross Garner from University of Melbourne, and, uh, those are scholars, you know, the provided the leadership right in terms of a championing the regional and global integration. So, at some stage, there's a concept of the so called open regionalism wide open regionalism. Sometimes if it is so difficult to have a wider, you know, the regional, uh uh, integration scheme so regional can be can be a way to go. Right? So we do have a PE PE CC before a PE, C and AC, a Cooper operation or R, CE P and all these things. Those things can still keep that arrangement rather open rather closed. And, uh, that were determined by, uh, 21 theory. Right. So the FT a can be working in a way, and so long as the arrangement allows the newcomers to to get in and more freely rather than being discriminated against everyone, so they were leading towards a two outcome. One outcome is the trade creation. The other outcome is a trade diversion diversion. Trade creation is that when you form this FDA, you allow others to come in. So therefore, the new opportunity new trade opportunity can be created. But however, if you have a very close arrangement, you know, small group discriminated against others. That means that those kind of trading arrangement can replace the most efficient suppliers from a third country. That means that those are most efficient. One is outside your group, but they are actually most efficient. Uh, producer and the supplier. The reason why they couldn't get in is because you have your own free trade, right agreement with a less efficient and, uh so that's the trade diversion. Trade diversion is not good in that one. So that's why, you know, raise all the issue about, uh, about this arrangement now, So, uh, over 300 globally 300 previous is very small numbers, but there's all countries involved that way, So getting that right will be very, very important. So economic reintegration, that's a prospect. The right one is a rather pessimistic. So after covid crisis going, continue to go downhill disruption, the global value chain weakening further the global trading system and the green one is actually is the optimistic view. That means yes, crisis actually hit. So therefore, you know, you can see the, uh you know, sharp draw, but again, you know you can recover from that one quite nicely. Which is again, is about, uh, the hope of reintegration. Right Then there's a scenario about, uh, about, uh, you know, the, uh the business as usual. So that this one shows right whether countries can passively wait right so well or being drifted in choosing a certain policy and strategy. Or, you know, the consensus of building Uh uh, to the extent that you know, countries have, uh you know, the previous page, you know, got that a consensus, right? So we can actually do better by By doing what? By doing the you know, the push for this reintegration. Even though crisis actually affects so many countries right? Rather negatively. So the sentiment of the country is that, well, let's protect, you know, let's let's just just let's protect our own and, uh for for the sake of, you know, preventing those shocks from next crisis in a way. But however, by doing so, you lose a big picture. The big picture is that it's a global reintegration and that reintegration trend as I we have another Article 2020 with Doctor Yi Xia and on K. So the three condition. One of the final condition on that one is the global reintegration, which can actually can allow, you know, for us work community to so called the term crisis into opportunity. That's one of the things we are. So the chance when when I saw that one is actually do do something or not doing something it critically right affects the the outcome. So the global trade can be revived in a way to the benefit of everyone and all continue to go downhill. And, uh, you know, uh, for everyone to suffer, everyone will suffer some, you know, leading countries in terms of technology, probably in a better position, But everyone else will suffer a lot in a way. So that's the situation we are facing now. And, uh so let me quickly go through that one. I think this one, go through, uh, is already covid impact and investment. So much disruption of self sufficiency here, this one, the first point, the popular argument about self sufficiency, and it's a downside risk. And, uh, I hope you will pay attention to that one because, uh, it's very popular among countries in the world. Very popular self sufficiency in certain industry, picking the winners right and the subsidies of government and the building that one. We have learned so much lessons in the past few, 77 decades. Right? So much lesson on that one and the wrong policy. And, uh, but now, you know, government in a position to to to revive that argument. So but anyway, you can make that kind of analysis, right? Based on what we have learned from our lecture 10 now, policy choices for, uh, I won't go through. That one you refer to lecture is the You know it. This is the kind of a triangle things right. It's more added. Uh uh. Added the so called, uh uh, terms of trade balance of payments. All is a dimension about that triangle I already mentioned, uh, in the previous one. So probably won. It's not about international financing, but, uh, about the policy choices facing developing country against this, uh, globalisation. Very unstable. Uh, international monetary and the financial system and against their liberalisation programme, free trade and free flow of capital. And, uh so then you have a choices of, uh of that you know, free flow of capital, fixed exchange rate and independence of monetary policy. It's happening about, uh, in 1997 in Asia. East Asian financial crisis. It actually happening now because, as you know, last week, you know so much, uh, the Federal Reserve seeing that No, we won't cut interest rate. Suddenly you can see the US dollar become much stronger against all the regional currencies. All the currencies, even Japanese yen depreciated, break the 0.160 yen per dollar. And, uh, Indonesia, Vietnam, India, China, Korea, in particular, Korea all depreciating very much. Then people say, Wow, we are repeating Asian financial crisis now because the the the choice is left for developing country is rather limited. Because you don't have that space to raise interest rate right to defend your currency against the capital flight because of the wide gap between, uh, interest rate differentials. But if you do, you can see domestic economy will suffer. We're all just recovering from the covid. How come you can do it? So the hope is really less than the Federal Reserve. The prospect of cutting interest rate so they will give a more breathing space for the regional economy. Korea is suffer a lot now. Japan is also that China is in a relative better position. And, uh, and, uh, but many other regional economy is also, anyway, similar things happen again. Now the question that I got a few questions, but, uh, you can have a let's go from the from the the final one. Why the global economic integration is conducive to economic recovery. I think that is very important, right? Or can we just rely on self sufficiency to be able to go, you know, to go through those kind of a crisis? OK, that's one thing. Can the regional economy grouping? That's why I just mentioned a lead to a global integration. It is a very big topic, rather profound, and current globalisation be reversed again. That's a that's a depends on your your belief right? It can can reversed or not, And that's the question. But the first question is that why it is important to have a clear understanding of the global policy environment in efforts to reintegrate the global economy. That means we have to understand similar kind of a requirement when we, uh when we ask you to write the uh, you know, the assignment right is for the challenge, but the strategy now, the, uh when you're doing that, when you already have a practise of making assessment about what sort of environment they have now. But now it's actually put on this topic for discussion. You can see what sort of, uh, efforts. Uh uh, need and, uh, getting those right. We have a historical physical monetary experiment and climate change and the digital technology. So those are the environment, Keep in mind in discussing those kind of strategy. So a bit of overtime, But I think we still can have, uh, 20 minutes for discussion. And then we can we can have, uh Let's just listen to your views on that. So let me, uh Yeah, I do that one. So yeah, just pause the recording.

SPEAKER 2
Jones. I will, uh, create a breakout room. You will have 20 minutes for discussion. Alright.

SPEAKER 3
You see, I can join the all right.

SPEAKER 2
I just, uh Open up our room. Please join for free. The recording has been paused. OK, good. Thanks. Yeah, How many there are? So you can, uh I think that's, uh seven.

SPEAKER 1
Ok, OK, OK.

SPEAKER 3
He is Yeah, on that programme I have not before Yeah, I come up with question. Why not just go this six? I agree. You need to answer or something. Any questions? No, you don't have to follow that. Let's consider. Could you join us? Uh, the ma, sir. One. Why? OK, we first. So we like, you know. OK, it's you know this So So they requested. Ok, you see the straight As long as it result. So OK, she council sir Hi. In build our society point increasing OK Che individual like Thanks E. He is very so they were Oh, so it means to Yes. Yeah. No, right. Is that far, right? Maybe. Yeah, OK. Yeah. So the whole yeah is ask him. Ask the girl from the different. For example, like the Ok, you have experience. So we have, uh, display video. You realise that the change to the just makes our the recovery or five? Yeah. You not aspect. Racing wars for well morning special class dependencies. We know that it maybe something We just re arrest it. And no, 34 only indoors trains No. Seven Mhm. Ok, let's say the T talk, But many are cheaper. Yeah. Interesting. I'll bring some Congratulations. Preparation for dependency. It gets OK. These fish. Yeah. You so Yeah, with this, uh, you know the chief, is it not, right? Yes. And with that, Mr Donahue, you know, as depression some this world in That's how many most the, uh she was coming Mhm. Something that my shoulder thanks. Old each other subsequent subs. They are. I see. So 100% your stuff subject it's a start has God. So I answer. It's very important to me. And so this give all of our best clothes Yeah. I in a large way is great and all right. And, uh so wasn't really for the next right now. So two major and university and the technology agreements here Pro. We need to to OK, yeah, because OK. Ok, Mhm Help the research. OK, present. I need something right. Then HIQ the H one. Yes, yes, you too. War Just like you. You can buy it. I I know. That's funny. Yeah, I think it is fine. A festival? No, it's been quite Do you see four eye achieving the most stuff Sur Yeah, and no sign. I ok, very you old. Thank you. Mhm doctors. No, that is the that Yeah. Oh, yeah, OK, Yeah. What? I and OK in the E. I have a yeah condition and the Yes, room four, You know, really mhm this hard. It has. What is it called? Or films you of his for? Just C. Um, Doctor, we got the, uh Yeah, OK. What? Me too soon. Oh, OK. They Yeah, we can start from here recording.

SPEAKER 1
Thanks. All right. So looks like Looks like we have a very good discussion, you know, even though the questions can be many, but the focus on particular one and draw some kind of a Yeah, some insights from that will be I think it's quite useful. It takes a little while for the the online student to get back. But, uh, let's, uh, let's go from here. So we've discussed the, uh we've discussed the last one

SPEAKER 4
while the global economic reintegration is conducted in economic recovery from the pandemic. Uh, especially during the pandemic time. We discussed the the case of vaccination. Um, because developing countries cannot have they They're quite some of the some of the industry that are quite fragile that cannot have the ability to produce all of them that can only, uh, imports from abroad. Say, say, say, because we talk about Bangladesh and and Indonesia, um, they're quite fragile. They do not have the ability, but the impact that the social impact of getting vaccinated, which is really, um, really essential. So, um, kind of, uh, re reintegration It's necessary for the developing countries, but that I rest, uh, that I that I raised up a case, which is, I think, that I watched the documentary called The American Factory or Chinese Factory in America say because because that case, um, demonstrated, um, because of the cultural differences from from China and America, they're quite distinct. So So they cannot integrate with each other the US labours they usually strike, but there's no strike in in China's company at all in in the mainland of China. So it's it's it's kind of really hard for some of the international company to in to integrate to localise themselves into into, uh, into into a broad like international market. I think that's problematic, but I mean, I'm a I I'm a I. I I'm kind of in the mutual study that do not support each each side. Uh, with Yeah.

SPEAKER 3
Now, Yeah, uh, we were talking about, uh, the re

SPEAKER 5
economic reintegration and their, um whether this is necessary or not. I think in case of developing countries, it's necessary because even if, um, I I if, uh, usually we don't have technological advantages. So by this integration, we can, um, get products from other countries who have that advantages. And I can actually export the product that I have advantage in, like it. It doesn't always have to be a cloth. It can be threads that I can produce threads, and it can be used as the raw material in other country to produce the clothing. So if I have that advantage, I should take that. So for that, I need that reintegration. And again if, uh, I grow if a country grows slowly and gets, uh, that kind of technological innovation and, uh, maybe I have to introduce my product to other countries. Look, that I am now developing. I have developed new products. This is my product. If you buy that, you'll have this kind of, uh, advantages. And this is good. Bangladeshi is currently doing that or Indonesia is currently, uh, doing that. So I have to present myself to a forum that I am capable right now I am growing so that that's why also, in a sort of way, I'm advertising myself my product. So we need that kind of reintegration to present ourselves to have that advantage as well.

SPEAKER 3
Yeah, OK, Our group has chosen question three for discussion,

SPEAKER 6
and our idea is that like, uh, especially we we look at the covid pandemic. The countries around the world start
