26
•
• Introduction
•
• The development gap and income distribution in the world economy
•
• Measures of inequality and historical trends
•
• International inequality (unweighted and population weighted)
•
• Global (or world) inequality
•
• The measurement and comparability of per capita income
•
• Purchasing power parity (PPP)
•
• Per capita income as an index of development
•
• Measuring poverty
•
• Meeting the Sustainable Development Goal of poverty reduction
•
• Tackling poverty from the ‘grass roots’
•
• Randomized control trials (RCTs)
•
• Human Development Index (HDI)
•
• Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)
•
• Can the poor countries ever catch up?
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Notes
•
• Websites on poverty and income distribution
THE DEVELOPMENT GAP  
AND THE MEASUREMENT  
OF POVERTY
2
27
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Introduction
This chapter focuses on three major topics: first, the development gap in the world economy 
and the measurement of the world distribution of income; second, the measurement of global 
poverty and the problems associated with the use of per capita income as a measure of develop-
ment; and third, the construction of alternative measures of economic and social development, 
including the Human Development Index (HDI) and the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) 
developed by the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, and both published in the 
Human Development Report of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
To measure the development gap, and the degree of income inequality across countries of the 
world, we consider:
•
• the absolute gap between the richest and poorest country (the range)
•
• the relative gap between the richest and poorest countries
•
• the dispersion of income per capita around the average level of per capita income for all countries
•
• the Gini ratio, which is derived from the Lorenz curve of the income distribution.
Using the Gini ratio, we distinguish between international inequality, which takes each country’s 
per capita income as just one observation (regardless of the distribution of income within coun-
tries) and global inequality, which takes account not only of the distribution of income between 
countries but also within countries (using household survey data). We show that international 
and global inequality have both risen since the beginning of the nineteenth century, but the major 
cause of global inequality today is inequality between nations, not inequality within nations.
It is important to recognize, however, that when measuring income inequality and poverty, the 
measures of income per head in US$ at official exchange rates are not necessarily a good measure 
of the purchasing power of local currencies (or what is called purchasing power parity, PPP), 
because official exchange rates do not take account of the much cheaper price of non-traded 
goods in poor countries relative to richer countries. We show how PPP is measured, and discuss 
in general the comparability of per capita incomes between countries, and the use of per capita 
income as an index of development.
Turning to the measurement of poverty, we discuss the World Bank’s criterion of absolute 
poverty, which is $1.90 a day at PPP, and give the headcount index of the numbers living below 
this level of income across different regions of the world. The concept of the poverty gap is also 
discussed, because the headcount index does not take account of how far below the poverty line 
people live. Another method of measuring poverty is the food energy method, which measures 
the income necessary to buy a certain nutritional intake in different countries.
The World Bank claims that it puts poverty reduction at the heart of all the work that it does, and 
in its World Development Report 2000/2001 (World Bank, 2000a), it proposed a three-pronged strategy 
for poverty reduction: promoting opportunity, facilitating empowerment and enhancing security. 
The meaning of these concepts is discussed in this chapter. Growth is, of course, central to poverty 
reduction, but how fast the poverty rate falls with growth (to meet the Sustainable Development 
Goal, for example) depends on the elasticity of the poverty rate with respect to growth.
To overcome the limitations of taking a single measure of per capita income as an index of 
development, the UNDP annually constructs a Human Development Index (HDI) and also pub-
lishes a Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI). The HDI is based on three variables: life expectancy 
at birth, educational attainment (measured as the geometric mean of the average and expected 
years of schooling), and the standard of living measured at PPP. The MPI is also based on three 
dimensions of poverty: education, health, and standard of living, but with several sub-dimensions 
28
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
of poverty as well. The rankings of countries by their level of per capita income are not the same 
as the rankings of countries by the HDI or MPI indices, because some countries devote more 
resources to social expenditure than others, particularly on education and health.
Finally, we consider the question of whether poor countries are ever likely to catch up with the 
rich, and we reach the pessimistic conclusion that it will take the average poor country at least 100 
years to achieve the current living standards in developed countries and probably 300 years for 
poor countries to equalize living standards with developed countries if they manage to grow, say, 
1% faster than the rich countries. But this, of course, cannot be taken for granted.
The development gap and income distribution in the world economy
By any measure one cares to take, the evidence is unequivocal that the world’s income is dis-
tributed extremely unequally between nations and people. There are many ways of classifying 
these divisions in the world economy. First, at a very basic level, there is the division between 
rich industrialized countries, mainly concentrated in the northern hemisphere, and poorer non-
industrialized (or semi-industrialized) countries in the southern hemisphere – often referred to in 
the development literature as the ‘North–South divide’.
Second, there is the division between continents: between the developed continents of Europe 
and North America on the one hand, and the continents of Asia, Africa and Latin America on the 
other. But the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are by no means homogeneous. They 
have many characteristics, and obstacles to development, in common, but there is also much 
that divides them, not least their economic performance since the 1960s, with Southeast Asia, 
China and India forging ahead, Africa left behind, and Latin America in the middle (often prone 
to financial crises).
Third, the World Bank, which was established by the Bretton Woods Agreement in 1944 as a 
development agency to lend to poor countries, classifies countries in its annual World Development 
Report into three broad categories: low-income, middle-income and high-income countries, with 
the middle-income countries split into lower middle-income and upper middle-income.
Table 2.1 lists the low-income and lower middle-income countries, and these are the countries 
normally thought of as developing countries. There are 36 low-income countries mainly concen-
trated in Africa, and 48 lower middle-income countries spread across the different continents. 
Table 2.2 gives the population and average level of per capita income in current dollars measured at 
the official exchange rate, and at PPP for 2014. We see that for low-income countries with a popula-
tion of 622 million, the average level of income per head is only $629 at current dollars and $1,570 
at PPP (or roughly $5 a day). For lower middle-income countries, with a population of nearly 3 bil-
lion, the average level of per capita income is $2,012 at current dollars and $6,000 at PPP (or roughly 
$16 a day). Compare these figures with an average income per head in high-income countries of 
roughly $40,000 (or just over $100 day). The discrepancies are huge. The richest country in the 
world is currently Norway, with an income per head of $66,330 at PPP, and the poorest countries 
are Democratic Republic of the Congo, with an income per head of $650, and Burundi with $770.
Measures of inequality and historical trends
1.	 One measure of dispersion is the range or absolute income gap between the richest and poor-
est countries. This gap is almost bound to grow over time if both the rich and poorest countries 
29
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Table 2.1  List of low-income and lower middle-income countries
Low-income countries
Afghanistan
Gambia, The
Myanmar
Bangladesh
Guinea
Nepal
Benin
Guinea-Bissau
Niger
Burkina Faso
Haiti
Rwanda
Burundi
Kenya
Sierra Leone
Cambodia
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Somalia
Central African Republic
Kyrgyz Republic
South Sudan
Chad
Liberia
Tajikistan
Comoros
Madagascar
Tanzania
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Malawi
Togo
Eritrea
Mali
Uganda
Ethiopia
Mozambique
Zimbabwe
experience positive growth. For example, if the richest country, Norway, grows at 1%, this adds 
roughly $700 to the level of per capita income in Norway, while the same growth rate adds 
only $6–$7 dollars to the per capita incomes of the Democratic Republic of the Congo or 
 
Burundi. These countries would have to grow at 700% for the absolute gap between them-
selves and Norway to be narrowed. But even the gap between the richest and poorest country 
is an understatement of the degree of income inequality in the world economy because it 
compares only the average income for poor and rich countries. If the income per head of the 
poorest people in poor countries is compared with the income per head of the richest people 
in rich countries, the absolute gap is even wider.
2.	 A second measure of dispersion, or division in the world economy, is the relative income gap, 
which is the ratio of the richest country (or group of countries) to the poorest country (or 
Lower middle-income countries
Armenia
India
Samoa
Bhutan
Kiribati
Sāo Tomé and Príncipe
Bolivia
Kosovo
Senegal
Cameroon
Lao PDR
Solomon Islands
Cape Verde
Lesotho
Sri Lanka
Congo, Rep.
Mauritania
Sudan
Cote d’Ivoire
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Swaziland
Djibouti
Moldova
Syrian Arab Republic
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Mongolia
Timor-Leste
El Salvador
Morocco
Ukraine
Georgia
Nigeria
Vanuatu
Guatemala
Pakistan
Vietnam
Guyana
Papua New Guinea
West Bank and Gaza
Honduras
Paraguay
Yemen, Rep.
Indonesia
Philippines
Zambia
Source: World Bank, website.
30
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Table 2.2  Population and income per capita, 2014
Population, millions
Gross national income 
per capita, $
PPP gross national 
income per capita, $
World
7,261
10,787
14,931
Low income
622
629
1,570
Middle income
5,240
4,666
9,673
Lower middle income
2,879
2,012
6,000
Upper middle income
2,361
7,901
14,179
Low and middle income
5,862
4,238
8,811
East Asia and Pacific
2,021
6,156
11,872
Europe and Central Asia
264
6,892
13,580
Latin America and 
Caribbean
525
8,990
14,053
Middle East and North 
Africa
357
4.222
11.834
South Asia
1,721
1,496
5,299
Sub-Saharan Africa
973
1,638
3,382
High income
1,399
38,274
40,749
Source: World Bank, 2015.
group of countries). At present, the ratio of income per head of the richest to the poorest 
country is approximately 700:1, and the ratio of income per head in the low-income countries 
to the high-income countries is approximately 60:1 at current exchange rates. This relative 
income gap is unprecedented historically. A necessary condition for the relative income gap to 
narrow is that the poorest countries grow faster than the richest.
3.	 A well-known statistical measure of dispersion is the standard deviation (SD), or the square 
root of the variance, which measures the average sum of the squared deviations of each coun-
try’s per capita income from the average (or mean) income for all countries. Formally, the SD 
is measured as:
where Yi is the per capita income of country i; Y
– is the average level of per capita income of 
the whole sample, and n is the number of countries. In the growth and development literature, 
movements in this ratio, up or down, are referred to as ‘sigma (s) divergence or convergence’, 
respectively.
4.	 There is the coefficient of variation, which is the SD divided by the mean of the sample 
(Y
–). This normalizes the SD because there is a positive correlation between the mean and 
the SD.
5.	 But the most widely used measure of income inequality is the so-called Gini ratio, derived 
from the Lorenz curve, which in this field of enquiry relates to the distribution of income 
in relation to the distribution of population across countries or groups of countries. Three 
SD =
n
i=
(Yi −Y)2
n
1
31
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
measures or concepts of inequality need to be clearly distinguished in using the Gini ratio. 
 
First, there is international inequality, with each country treated as a single unit and given 
equal weight in the measure. Second, there is weighted international inequality, with each 
country treated as a single unit but weighted by its size of population. Third, there is world 
or global inequality, which takes the individual person (or household), not the country, as the 
unit of measurement, and therefore takes into account not only differences in income between 
countries, but also between people within countries. Each measure has its own purpose, and 
there is no theoretical reason why the measures should move together (although, in practice, 
they tend to, taking a long historical perspective).
Before describing how the Lorenz curve is constructed and the Gini ratio is measured, 
however, it needs to be said in advance that a single statistic does not say what is happening 
within the distribution, and, in particular, what is happening at the extremes of the distribu-
tion. Ratios of extremes, such as the income of the poorest 10% of the world’s population 
compared with the richest 10% (often called the Kuznets ratio), or income of the poorest 
countries compared with the richest, can say as much, if not more, about income inequal-
ity and social justice than any integral measure. In fact, the Gini ratio may indicate con-
vergence or less inequality, while the ratio of extremes is increasing. For discussion of the 
conceptual problems relating to analysis of the world distribution of income, see Atkinson 
and Brandolini (2010).
Consider now Figure 2.1. On the vertical axis is measured the percentage of income, and on the 
horizontal axis is measured the percentage of population. To draw the distribution of income (the 
Lorenz curve) first rank each country, groups of countries, or groups of individuals in ascending 
order according to the ratio of the percentage of income they receive and the percentage of popu-
lation they represent; then cumulate the observations, and plot them on the diagram. To give a 
Figure 2.1  Lorenz curve diagram
10
10
2
9
25
81
0
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
% of population
% of income
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
32
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
simple example, suppose we take the World Bank’s division of countries into low, middle and high 
income, and that low-income countries contain 9% of the world’s population and receive only 
2% of world income, middle-income countries contain 72% of the world’s population and receive 
23% of world income, and rich countries contain 19% of the world’s population and receive 75% 
of world income. The cumulative distribution of income in relation to population would then be 
2/9, then 25/81 (when middle-income country figures are added), and finally 100/100 when the 
rich countries are added.
These points are plotted in Figure 2.1 and the curve joining them is the Lorenz curve. The diag-
onal 450 line on the diagram shows an equal distribution of income. The position of the Lorenz 
curve in relation to the 450 line therefore gives a visual impression of the degree of inequality. The 
closer the Lorenz curve, the more equal the distribution, and the more ‘bowed’ the curve, the 
more unequal the distribution.
The Gini ratio is calculated as the area between the Lorenz curve and the 458 line divided by 
the area of the triangle it lies within. If the Lorenz curve is coincident with the 458 line, the Gini 
coefficient would be zero – complete equality. If one person received all the world’s income, the 
Lorenz curve would follow the horizontal and vertical axes and the Gini coefficient would be 
one. When we examine international and global inequality, what we find is that through time, 
at least since the early 1900s, the Lorenz curve has been shifting outwards, and the Gini ratio has 
been rising, although according to some investigators, it may recently have levelled off, albeit at 
a high level. A central estimate for the current level of international inequality would be a Gini 
ratio of 0.54, and for global inequality a Gini ratio of 0.67. But, as we shall come to see, estimates 
vary depending on factors such as the sample of countries taken, how income is measured – 
whether by per capita income or household income – and whether income is measured at official 
exchange rates or at PPP rates.
There have been many recent studies measuring and summarizing what has been happen-
ing to international and global inequality historically (e.g. Milanovic, 2005, 2016; Bourguignon 
and Morrisson, 2002), and particularly since the 1950s (e.g. Norwegian Institute of Economic 
Affairs, 2000; Sala-í-Martin, 2002; Maddison, 2003; Ghose, 2004; Wade, 2004; Sutcliffe, 2004; 
Svedberg, 2004; Milanovic, 2005, 2016). What does the evidence show? We distinguish 
between international inequality (unweighted and weighted by population) and global (or 
world) inequality.
International inequality (unweighted and population weighted)
The unweighted Gini ratio of international inequality takes each country as one unit, regard-
less of population size, and assumes that each person within the country has the same average 
income. The distribution of income within the country is not considered. It is countries that 
are the focus, not people. The ratio is basically, therefore, a measure of whether or not coun-
tries are converging with each other, not whether the distribution of income across individuals 
in the world is becoming more or less equal. What does the evidence show? Using the best 
historical data available (Maddison, 2001; Bourguignon and Morrisson, 2002) for 26 coun-
tries covering nearly 80% of the world’s population, the Gini ratio in 1820 was approximately 
0.2. This is very low by current standards. Two hundred years ago, international differences in 
income per head were not great. Maddison (2003) and Easterlin (2000) show that the ratio of 
33
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
per capita income of the richest to the poorest country in 1820 was only 3:1, compared with 
nearly 700:1 today.
Table 2.3 shows the evolution of the unweighted Gini ratio through time, rising consist-
ently to 0.54 in 2013 – a more than doubling of income inequality in the space of nearly 200 
years. Some of the increase may be spurious due to the larger sample of countries used to cal-
culate the ratio, but Milanovic (2005, 2016) shows that for the same 26 countries as used for 
the 1820 calculations, the Gini ratio still rises to just over 0.5 in 2000. For the period since the 
Second World War, the Gini ratio shows an increase for a consistent set of over 100 countries 
from 0.45 in 1952 to a peak of 0.58 in 2002. Since then, it has been falling slightly due to the 
fast growth of China and India, and some African countries because of the rise in commodity 
prices (Bourguignon, 2015).
Turning now to the population-weighted measure of international inequality, Table 2.3 tells a 
slightly different story. It shows the Gini ratio peaking at 0.6 in 1988 and falling consistently to 0.47 
in 2013. This implies that poor countries with large populations must have been growing faster 
on average than richer countries with smaller populations. In the 1950s and 1960s, this was due 
to the fast growth of some of the big Latin American countries, such as Brazil and Mexico, and 
Japan and South Korea, all using trade protection of one form or another. In the 1990s and 2000s, 
the decline in the weighted Gini ratio has been largely due to the rapid growth of a small number 
of poor populous Asian countries, especially India and China. Ghose (2004), in his study of 96 
countries over the period 1981 to 1997, finds that the weighted Gini ratio fell by 0.7% per annum, 
Table 2.3  A comparison of Gini ratios
International inequality
Global (or world) inequality
Year
Unweighted
Population 
weighted
Milanovic (2005, 
2016)
Bourguignon and 
Morrisson (2002)
Sala-í-Martin 
(2002)
1820
0.20
0.12
0.50
1870
0.29
0.26
0.56
1890
0.31
0.30
0.59
1913
0.37
0.37
0.61
1929
0.35
0.40
0.62
1938
0.35
0.40
1952
0.45
0.57
0.64
1960
0.46
0.55
0.64
1978
0.47
0.54
0.66
0.66 (1970)
1988
0.53
0.60
0.68
0.65
1993
0.56
0.59
0.70
0.66 (1992)
0.64
1998
0.56
0.57
0.69
0.63
2002
0.58
0.56
0.71
0.63 (2000)
2005
0.57
0.54
0.70
2008
0.55
0.51
0.69
2011
0.54
0.48
0.67
2013
0.54
0.47
Sources: Adapted from Milanovic, 2005, Table 11.1; Milanovic, 2016.
34
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
but only 17 of the 76 developing countries in the sample converged on the per capita income of 
the 20 developed countries. The majority of poor developing countries diverged. Despite the fall 
in the ratio since 1988, it is still high and much higher than the estimate of 0.12 in 1820. In other 
words, for a large part of the past two centuries, the world’s poorest and most populous countries 
have fared badly compared with the smaller, rich countries of the world. China and India are now 
reversing the trend, but for how long remains to be seen.
Global (or world) inequality
The Gini ratio of global (or world) inequality takes into account not only differences in average 
per capita income between countries, but also differences in income per capita within countries. 
Because internal income distributions are never equal, the measure of global inequality is bound to 
be higher than the unweighted measure of international inequality. It also means that changes in the 
global distribution of income are an amalgam of forces, including what is happening to the distribu-
tion of income between countries, what is happening to population growth in rich and poor coun-
tries, and what is happening to the distribution of income within countries. What does the evidence 
show? As far as the historical record is concerned, Bourguignon and Morrisson (2002) have tried to 
measure inequality among world citizens back to 1820 using a sample of 33 countries (or groups 
of countries) and measuring domestic income inequality by taking decile income shares (with the 
top decile of income earners divided into two). The results are shown in Table 2.3 above. It can be 
seen that the global Gini ratio in 1820 was already 0.5, more than double the level of international 
inequality, implying that domestic inequality was as great, if not greater, than inter­
national inequal-
ity. Through time, global inequality has increased, but because of rising inter­
national ­
inequality, not 
because of even greater inequality within countries. On the contrary, domestic income inequality, 
at least until recently, has shown a decrease historically, particularly in the richer countries of the 
world. Bourguignon and Morrisson calculate that within-country inequality accounted for 80% of 
global inequality in the first half of the nineteenth century, when most countries were more or 
less at the same income level, but by 1950, within-country inequality accounted for 40% of global 
inequality because of the increase in inequality between countries. Today, the contribution is about 
20%. The Gini ratio of global inequality seems to have peaked in the early 2000s at 0.71 and has since 
declined (Bourguignon, 2015). But conflicting forces are at work. Population-weighted international 
inequality is falling because of the fast growth of India and China, but income distribution within 
some countries is widening, such as between the urban and rural sectors of China and India and 
in some developed countries such as the USA and countries of Europe. If the income distribution 
within countries was falling, the global Gini ratio would evidence a greater fall.
Sala-í-Martin (2002) covers the period 1970–98, taking the income distribution of 125 coun-
tries and aggregating them. Despite the much larger sample, the calculated global Gini ratios are 
remarkably similar to those of Bourguignon and Morrisson. The estimate for 1970 is 0.66, grad­
ually falling to 0.63 in 2000 (see Table 2.3). The explanation for the slight fall is that the lower ‘tail’ 
of the aggregated income distribution has shifted rightwards more dramatically than the upper 
‘tail’, largely due to developments in China and India. Fast growth in these two countries has lifted 
millions of people above the poverty line, and has reduced the relative income gap with richer 
countries, and this has been enough to just offset the worsening income distribution within China 
and India, as mentioned earlier. Still, we have evidence again of global inequality on a vast scale.
Milanovic (2005, 2016) has also undertaken the Herculean task of bringing together 300 
household sample surveys of income and expenditure for over 100 countries for selected years 
from 1988 to 2011, covering 80–90% of the world’s population. The calculated global Gini ratio 
35
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
using household income or expenditure measured at PPP is 0.68 in 1988 and 0.67 in 2011 (see 
Table 2.3). These estimates are remarkably similar to those of Sala-í-Martin, despite the difference 
in samples and the measure of income. Bourguignon (2015) gives a figure of 0.691 for 2010. These 
results are confirmed by Edward (2006) using national consumption distributions and collating 
them into a global distribution measured at PPP in US$ for 1993 and 2001. The global Gini ratio 
is estimated at 0.610 for 1993 and 0.614 for 2001. Just over 80% of this inequality is the result of 
between-country differences.
All the evidence and studies show a massive degree of inequality in the world distribution of 
income, which shows some recent improvement but may not last if growth in China and India 
slows and the income distribution within countries gets worse. This development gap naturally 
extends into other aspects of human welfare such as health, nutrition, life expectancy, education, 
employment opportunities and so on, as we shall come to see later in this chapter and in Chapters 3 
and 7. The UNDP (1997) has described the world as ‘gargantuan in its excesses and grotesque in 
its human and economic inequalities’. This is, of course, a normative statement, but economists 
should not be afraid of making normative statements, as Basu (2006) does when he argues that:
the hiatus between the richest and the poorest people is too large, and the extent of poverty 
on earth is unacceptable. I like to believe that there will come a time when, looking back at 
today’s world, human beings will wonder how primitive we were that we tolerated this.
Many other statistics can be given to illustrate the grotesque inequalities that exist. The richest 
1% of people in the world receive as much income as the bottom 60%. Or, to put it another way, 
the 60 million richest people receive as much income as 2.7 billion poor. The total income of the 
richest 25 million Americans is equal to the total income of 2 billion of the world’s poorest people. 
The assets of the world’s 400 billionaires (mostly in rich countries) exceed the total amount of 
income of nearly one-half of the world’s total population.
The most evocative graph comes from Wade (2001), who divides the world’s population 
up into equal 20% shares (quintiles) from poorest to richest, and then shows the percentage of 
income that each share receives. Interestingly, and ironically, the picture resembles a champagne 
glass with a very narrow stem in the hands of the poor and a wide open bowl (containing the 
champagne) in the hands of the rich (Figure 2.2).
Below we discuss some technical problems concerning the measurement and comparability of 
per capita income across countries, and the measurement of poverty itself.
Figure 2.2  
Distribution of world income (percentage of total, with quintiles of population ranked 
by income)
82.7%
11.7%
2.3%
1.9%
1.4%
Each horizontal band
represents an equal
fifth of the world’s people
POOREST
20%
FOURTH
20%
THIRD
20%
SECOND
20%
RICHEST
20%
Source: Wade, 2001, based on Figure 3.2 in UNDP, 1992.
36
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The measurement and comparability of per capita income
When using per capita income (PCY) figures to measure poverty, to classify countries into rich 
and poor, and to compare the rate of development in different countries over time, the difficulties 
of measuring real per capita income and real living standards between countries must be continu-
ally borne in mind. There are two issues to discuss. The first concerns the problems associated 
with national income accounting, particularly in developing countries. The second is the need 
to convert each country’s per capita income in its own domestic currency into a common unit of 
account (e.g. the US$) so as to be able to make meaningful international comparisons of living 
standards. This leads to the topic of purchasing power parity (PPP) estimates of PCY.
Turning first to national income accounting, the first point to bear in mind is that only goods 
that are produced and sold at a price in the market are included in the value of national income, 
measured by either the output or the expenditure method. Much output in developing countries 
never reaches the market, particularly in the rural sector where production is for subsistence pur-
poses. If no allowance is made for the subsistence sector, this will bias downwards the calculation 
of national income, and therefore PCY. This point also implies that growth rates will tend to have 
an upward bias as a result of the extension of the money economy and the shift of economic 
activities from the household and subsistence sector to the marketplace. Part of the growth in 
developing countries may be a statistical illusion arising from the changing balance between the 
informal subsistence sector and the modern exchange sector.
Second, there is the sheer practical difficulty of measuring money national income in a rural 
economy where communications are bad, illiteracy is rife, and accounting procedures are rudi-
mentary. Differences in the extent of the subsistence economy between developing countries, 
and differences in the ease and difficulty of collecting data, may markedly influence estimates of 
national income, and therefore of per capita income differences, between these countries and the 
rest of the world. Attempts are made in developing countries to make some allowance for pro-
duction that never reaches the marketplace, but the estimates are likely to be subject to a wide 
margin of error.
Some testimony to the role that the subsistence sector must play in the economies of most 
developing countries is provided by the inconceivability that 10% of the world’s population could 
remain alive on less than $1,000 per annum. But this is not the whole story.
Purchasing power parity (PPP)
The other part of the story, and probably the major part, concerns the understatement of living 
standards in developing countries when their national incomes measured in local currencies are 
converted into US$ (as the common unit of account) at the official rate of exchange. If the US$ is 
used as the unit of account, the national per capita income of country X in US$ is given by:
GNPX
Population  4  Exchange rate
For example, if the GNP of country X is 100 billion rupees, its population is 5 million, and there are 
10 rupees to the dollar, then the per capita income of country X in dollars is:
100 billion
5 million  4 10 5 $2,000
37
  t  5 ) &  % & 7 & - 0 1 . & / 5  ( " 1  " / %  5 ) &  . & " 4 6 3 & . & / 5  0 '  1 0 7 & 3 5 : 
#VUJGUIFMJWJOHTUBOEBSETPGUIFUXPDPVOUSJFTBSFUPCFDPNQBSFECZUIJTNFUIPEJUNVTUCF
BTTVNFEUIBUSVQFFTJODPVOUSZXCVZTUIFTBNFMJWJOHTUBOEBSEBTJOUIF64"*UJTXFMM
LOPXOIPXFWFSUIBUPċDJBMFYDIBOHFSBUFTCFUXFFOUXPDPVOUSJFTDVSSFODJFTBSFOPUHPPE
NFBTVSFTPGUIF111CFUXFFODPVOUSJFTFTQFDJBMMZCFUXFFODPVOUSJFTBUEJĊFSFOUMFWFMTPGEFWFM-
PQNFOUʾFSFBTPOJTUIBUFYDIBOHFSBUFTBSFMBSHFMZEFUFSNJOFECZUIFTVQQMZPGBOEEFNBOE
GPSDVSSFODJFTCBTFEPOHPPETBOEBTTFUTUIBUBSFUSBEFE	UIFQSJDFTPGXIJDIUFOEUPCFFRVBMJ[FE
JOUFSOBUJPOBMMZ
CVUMJWJOHTUBOEBSETEFQFOEBMTPPOUIFQSJDFTPGnon-traded goods, which are 
MBSHFMZEFUFSNJOFECZVOJUMBCPVSDPTUTBOEUIFTFUFOEUPCFMPXFSUIFQPPSFSUIFDPVOUSZ"TB
general rule, it can be said that the lower the level of development and the poorer the country, the 
MPXFSUIFQSJDFPGOPOUSBEFEHPPETSFMBUJWFUPUSBEFEHPPETBOEUIFNPSFUIFVTFPGUIFPċDJBM
FYDIBOHFSBUFXJMMunderstateUIFMJWJOHTUBOEBSETPGUIFEFWFMPQJOHDPVOUSZNFBTVSFEJO64
-FUVTHJWFBTJNQMFFYBNQMFʾFNPUPSDBSJTBOJOUFSOBUJPOBMMZUSBEFEHPPE4VQQPTFUIBUUIF
EPMMBSQSJDFPGBQBSUJDVMBSNPEFMPGDBSJTBOEUIFSFBSFSVQFFTUPUIFEPMMBS*HOPSJOH
USBOTQPSUDPTUTUBSJĊTBOETPPOUIFQSJDFPGUIFDBSJO*OEJBXJMMCF35
rupees, otherwise a proﬁt will be made by dealers buying in the cheapest market and selling in the 
NPTUFYQFOTJWFʾFGPSDFTPGEFNBOEBOETVQQMZ	BOEBSCJUSBHF
XJMMFRVBMJ[FUIFQSJDFPGUSBEFE
HPPET#VUMFUVTOPXDPOTJEFSBOPOUSBEFEHPPETVDIBTBIBJSDVU4VQQPTFBIBJSDVUJOUIF64"
DPTUT"UUIFPċDJBMFYDIBOHFSBUFPGSVQFFTUPUIFEPMMBSBIBJSDVUJO*OEJBTIPVMECF
SVQFFT#VUTVQQPTFUIBUJOGBDUJUJTPOMZSVQFFTʾJTXPVMENFBOUIBUBTGBSBTIBJSDVUTBSF
DPODFSOFEUIFWBMVFPGUIFSVQFFJTVOEFSFTUJNBUFECZBGBDUPSPGGPVSʾF111SBUFPGFYDIBOHF
GPSIBJSDVUTBMPOFJT4SVQFFTPS5SVQFFT*GUIFOBUJPOBMJODPNFPGDPVOUSZX 
NFBTVSFEJOSVQFFTXBTEJWJEFECZJOTUFBEPGUIFOBUJPOBMJODPNFPGDPVOUSZX in dollars, 
BOEUIFSFGPSF1$:JOEPMMBSTXPVMEOPXCFGPVSUJNFTIJHIFSQFSIFBEJOTUFBEPG
QFSIFBEBTJOUIFFYBNQMFBCPWF
"TEFWFMPQNFOUQSPDFFETUIFSBUJPPGUIFQSJDFPGOPOUSBEFEHPPETUPUSBEFEHPPETUFOET
UPSJTFBTXBHFMFWFMTJOUIFOPOUSBEFEHPPETTFDUPSSJTFCVUQSPEVDUJWJUZHSPXUIJTTMPXoTMPXFS
UIBOJOUIFUSBEFEHPPETTFDUPSTo make meaningful international comparisons of income 
and living standards, therefore, what is required is a measure of PPP, or a real exchange rate, 
between countries.
ʾFSFBSFTFWFSBMNFUIPETPGDPOTUSVDUJOH111SBUJPTJOPSEFSUPNBLFCJOBSZDPNQBSJTPOT
	POFDPVOUSZXJUIBOPUIFS
PSANVMUJMBUFSBMDPNQBSJTPOTJOXIJDIUIFDVSSFODZPGBOZPOFPGB
group of countries can act as the unit of account without altering the ratios of living standards 
CFUXFFODPVOUSJFT
ʾFNPTUDPNNPOXBZPGDPOTUSVDUJOHB111SBUJPCFUXFFOUXPDPVOUSJFT	TBZ*OEJBBOE
UIF64"
JTUPUBLFBSFQSFTFOUBUJWFDPNQBSBCMFCBTLFUPGHPPETBOETFSWJDFTJOCPUIDPVOUSJFT
BOEUIFOUBLFUIFXFJHIUFEBWFSBHFPGQSJDFTXIFSFUIFXFJHIUT	wi
SFnFDUUIFQSPQPSUJPOPG
FYQFOEJUVSFPOFBDIHPPEJOUPUBMFYQFOEJUVSFʾF111SBUFPGFYDIBOHFCFUXFFO*OEJBBOEUIF
64"JTUIFSFGPSF
 PPP 5  wiIPiI
wiUSPiUS
 ,
where PiI is the price of the good in India and PiUSJTUIFQSJDFPGUIFHPPEJOUIF64"
ʾFEJĊFSFODFCFUXFFOFTUJNBUFTPG1$:BUUIFPċDJBMFYDIBOHFSBUFBOE111FTUJNBUFTPG
1$:GPSTBZUIFMPXJODPNFDPVOUSJFTDBOCFTFFOJO5BCMF	Q
ʾFEJĊFSFODFJTRVJUF
MBSHF"UUIFPċDJBMFYDIBOHFSBUFUIFMFWFMPG1$:JTPOMZQFSBOOVNCVUBU111JUJT
PSNPSFUIBOEPVCMF*OPUIFSXPSETJOMPXJODPNFDPVOUSJFTBQFSTPOTJODPNFXPVMECFBCMF
37
38
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
to buy more than twice the goods and services that the official exchange rate would suggest. 
Notice that in high-income countries, there is hardly any difference between the two estimates 
because wage costs per unit of output in the non-traded goods sector match those of the traded 
goods sector.
Per capita income as an index of development
Now let us turn to the question of the use of per capita income figures as an index of development 
and for making a distinction between developed and developing countries, as well as between rich 
and poor. While there may be an association between poverty and underdevelopment and riches 
and development, there are a number of reasons why some care must be taken when using per 
capita income figures alone as a measure or indicator of development (unless underdevelopment 
is defined as poverty and development as riches). Apart from the difficulty of measuring income 
in many countries and the difficulty of making intercountry comparisons, using a single per capita 
income figure to separate developed from developing countries is inevitably somewhat arbitrary, 
because it ignores such factors as the distribution of income within countries, differences in devel-
opment potential and other physical indicators of the quality of life. It is not so much a question 
of whether or not low-income countries should be labelled ‘underdeveloped’ or ‘developing’, but 
what income level should be used as the criterion for separating the developed from the develop-
ing countries, and whether all high-income countries should necessarily be labelled ‘developed’. 
In many ways, it should be the nature and characteristics of the countries that determine which 
income level should be used as the dividing line. It also makes sense to categorize separately the 
oil-rich countries, which have high per capita incomes but cannot be regarded as developed by 
the criteria discussed in Chapter 1.
Acronyms abound to describe the different stages of development. Perhaps the most amusing 
set is attributable to the Brazilian economist Roberto Campos, who distinguishes five categories 
of countries: the HICs, PICs, NICs, MICs and DICs. These stand for hardly industrialized countries, 
partly industrialized countries, newly industrialized countries, mature industrialized countries 
and decadent industrialized countries. The HICs and the PICs would certainly cover all the low-
income countries and at least the lower half of the middle-income countries. The NICs cover most 
of the upper half of the middle-income countries – Brazil, Mexico, Hong Kong and Singapore 
being prime examples. The MICs and DICs cover most of those countries classified as ‘industrial 
market economies’, with the exception of New Zealand and Australia, which have become rich 
through agriculture.
But bearing in mind the arbitrariness of per capita income, it is still very convenient to have 
a readily available and easily understandable criterion for classifying countries, and perhaps per 
capita income is the best single index we have. It also has one positive advantage, namely that it 
focuses on the raison d’être of development: raising living standards and eradicating poverty. And, 
in the last resort, per capita income is not a bad proxy for the social and economic structure of 
most societies. If developing countries are defined on the basis of a per capita income level so as 
to include most of the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, striking similarities are found 
between the characteristics and development obstacles of many of the countries in these contin­
ents. These include:
•
• A high proportion of the labour force engaged in agriculture with low productivity.
•
• A high proportion of domestic expenditure on food and necessities.
39
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
•
• An export trade dominated by primary products and an import trade dominated by manufac-
tured goods.
•
• A low level of technology and poor human capital.
•
• A high birth rate coupled with a falling death rate.
•
• Savings undertaken by a small percentage of the population.
There are, of course, some countries that on a per capita income basis are classified as developed 
and possess many of the above-mentioned characteristics (e.g. some oil-producing countries), 
but the exceptions are few, and the reverse of this situation would be unusual. Also, these coun-
tries have many social problems in common, such as growing unemployment in urban areas, 
inegalitarian income distributions, and poor health and standards of education – about which we 
shall say more later.
In general, therefore, it can be said that per capita income may be used as a starting point for 
classifying levels of development, and can certainly be used to identify the need for development. 
The only major reservation that we shall have to consider later concerns the case of geographic­
ally dual economies, where an aggregate per capita income figure can disguise as great a need for 
the development of a sizeable region within the country as the need for the development of the 
country itself.
There is a difference, however, between using per capita income as a guideline for classifying 
countries into developed or underdeveloped at a point in time and using the growth of per capita 
income as an index of development over time. The difficulty of using per capita income for the 
latter purpose is the obvious one that if, in a particular period, per capita income did not grow 
because population growth matched the growth of a country’s total income, one would be forced 
into the odd position of denying that a country had developed even though its national product 
had increased. This is an inherent weakness of linking the concept of development to a measure 
of living standards.
This leads on to the distinction between growth and development. Development without 
growth is hardly conceivable, but growth is possible without development. The upswing of the 
trade cycle is the most obvious example of the possibility of growth without development; and 
examples of abortive ‘take-offs’ are not hard to find where countries have grown rapidly for a 
short time and then reverted to relative stagnation. Historically, Argentina is a case in point. On 
the other hand, development is hardly possible without growth; but development is possible, as 
we have suggested, without a rise in per capita income. It would be a strange, rather purposeless 
type of development, however, that left per capita income unchanged, unless the stationary per 
capita income was only temporary and a strong foundation was being laid for progress in the 
future. The ultimate rationale of development must be to improve living standards and welfare, 
and while an increase in measured per capita income may not be a sufficient condition for an 
increase in individual welfare, it is a necessary condition in the absence of a radical redistribution 
of income and the provision of basic needs to the poor.
Measuring poverty
The World Bank defines poverty as the inability of people to attain a minimum standard of living. 
The World Bank’s 1990 and 2000/2001 World Development Reports were devoted to a consider­
ation of the measurement, magnitude and nature of poverty in developing countries, and how to 
tackle it. This definition gives rise to three questions. How do we measure the standard of living? 
40
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
What is meant by a minimum standard of living? How can we express the overall extent of poverty 
in a single measure?
The most obvious measure of living standards is an individual’s (or household’s) real income 
or expenditure (with an allowance made for output produced for own consumption). The same 
level of real income and expenditure in different countries, however, may be associated with dif-
ferent levels of nutrition, life expectancy, infant mortality, schooling and so on, which must be 
considered as an integral part of ‘the standard of living’. Measures of living standards based on per 
capita income, therefore, may need to be supplemented by further measures that include these 
other variables. Later in this chapter, we discuss the attempt by the UNDP to construct a Human 
Development Index, and the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative to construct a 
Multidimensional Poverty Index, which take some of these factors into account.
To separate the poor from the not so poor, an arbitrary per capita income figure has to be taken 
that is sufficient to provide a minimum acceptable level of consumption. There are two main ways 
of setting a consumption poverty line in order to measure poverty and make comparison across 
countries: the PPP method and the food energy method. As we have seen above, a country’s PPP 
is defined as the number of units of the country’s currency required to buy the same amount of 
goods and services in the domestic market as a dollar in the USA. The World Bank publishes the 
PPP levels of per capita income for all countries and regions of the world (see Table 2.2 on p. 30). 
For the measurement of poverty, to give an example, the PPP poverty line could be set at, say, $60 
per month or $720 per annum. By definition, people on this PPP poverty line in any country have 
the purchasing power to obtain the same level of consumption of any person on the poverty line 
in any other country. But the composition of the consumption bundle is very likely to differ. The 
PPP poverty line is not explicitly linked to nutritional intakes derived from different consumption 
bundles, so there are likely to be intercountry differences in nutrition on the PPP poverty line.
The food energy method of setting a consumption poverty line is one way of dealing with this 
problem by defining a minimum internationally agreed calorie intake line, and converting con-
sumption bundles into calorie intakes using the nutritional values of consumption goods (with 
non-food goods having a zero value). The problem here, however, is that consumers in different 
countries may choose different combinations of food and other goods, which then require different 
incomes to meet nutritional requirements. Indeed, the nature of the society and the stage of devel-
opment reached may require different combinations. What are regarded as optional extras in some 
countries may be necessities in others. The UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization defines under-
nourishment as ‘food intake that is continuously insufficient to meet dietary energy requirements’.
A consumption-based poverty line can therefore be thought of as comprising two elements: 
an objective measure of the expenditure necessary to buy a minimum level of nutrition; and a 
subjective additional amount that varies from country to country, reflecting the cost to individ­
uals of participating in the everyday life of society.
All this is in theory. In practice, to measure the extent of extreme poverty in the world, the 
World Bank takes $1.90 a day at PPP at 2011 prices as the cut-off point. This used to be $1.25 a 
day at 1995 prices (and before that at approximately $1 a day), but the revised poverty line was 
introduced in 2014 to reflect the rising cost of basic food, clothing and shelter. The real value of 
$1.90 a day at 2011 prices is the same as $1.25 a day at 2005 prices.
Given the poverty line, the simplest way to measure the amount of poverty is by the headcount 
index, which simply adds up the number of people who fall below the poverty line, which can 
also be expressed as a proportion of the total population, giving the poverty rate. In 2012, there 
were just under 900 million, or nearly 13% of humanity, living in extreme poverty. The numbers in 
poverty and the poverty rates for different areas of the world are shown in Table 2.4. Sub-Saharan 
 
41
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Africa has by far the highest incidence of extreme poverty, with 43% of the population living on 
less than $1.90 a day – a staggering figure. Students reading this book might like to try the experi-
ment of living on such a meagre sum, and see how they fare.
Paul Collier (2007) once called those living on less than $1 a day the bottom billion. On the 
new estimates of absolute poverty, the ‘bottom billion’ have become the ‘bottom 900 million’ 
caught in the four ‘poverty traps’ he identifies: the conflict trap (civil wars); the natural resources 
trap (the curse of natural resources – see Chapter 3); the trap of being landlocked with bad neigh-
bours; and the trap of bad governance in a small country.
One weakness of the headcount index, however, is that it ignores the extent to which the poor 
fall below the poverty line, so that comparisons between countries, or over time, using only the 
headcount index or the poverty rate, do not tell the full story. To overcome this weakness, the 
concept of the poverty gap is used and measured. This measures the proportionate gap between 
the average level of income below the poverty line and the poverty line itself. For example, if the 
poverty line is $1.90 a day and the average income for the poor below the poverty line is $1.50 a 
day, then the poverty gap is ($1.90 2 $1.50)/$1.90 5 0.21 or 21%. The poverty gap for different 
regions of the world is shown in Table 2.5. It can be seen that the poverty gap is by far the highest 
in sub-Saharan Africa at 16.47%.
Table 2.4  Absolute poverty and poverty rates, 1990 and 2012
Global and regional poverty at the poverty line of $1.90 per day (at 2011 PPP)
Region
Number of poor in millions
Poverty rate, % of population
1990
2012
1990
2012
East Asia and Pacific
996
147
60.6
7.2
Europe and Central Asia
9
10
1.9
2.1
Latin America and the 
Caribbean
78
34
17.8
5.6
Middle East and North 
Africa
14
6.0
South Asia
575
309
50.6
18.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
288
389
56.8
42.7
World
1,959
897
37.1
12.7
Source: World Bank, 2015.
Table 2.5  Poverty gap at $1.90 a day (2011 PPP) (%)
2012
East Asia and Pacific (developing only)
1.47
Europe and Central Asia (developing only)
0.58
Latin America and Caribbean (developing only)
2.64
Low income
18.6
Lower middle income
4,69
Low and middle income
4.35
Middle East and North Africa (developing)
Sub-Saharan Africa (developing only)
16.47
Source: World Bank, 2015.
42
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The difference for every individual could also be summed and expressed as a proportion of 
total GDP. This would give the proportion of total income that would have to be redistributed to 
raise everyone above the poverty line.
The focus of the World Bank is now very much on poverty eradication. When Robert 
McNamara was president of the World Bank in the 1970s, he defined absolute poverty as ‘a con-
dition of life so degraded by disease, illiteracy, and malnutrition and squalor, as to deny its victims 
basic human necessities – [a condition] so limited as to prevent the realisation of the potential 
of the genes with which one was born’. In May 1992, Lewis Preston, the then president of the 
World Bank, declared that poverty reduction will be ‘the benchmark by which our performance 
as a development institution will be measured’. And in the World Development Report 2000/2001, 
James Wolfensohn, the then president, wrote: ‘Poverty amidst plenty is the world’s greatest chal-
lenge. We at the Bank have made it our mission to fight poverty with passion and professionalism, 
putting it at the centre of all the work that we do’ (World Bank, 2000a). Jim Yong Kim, the current 
president, has said: ‘I want to eradicate poverty. I think there is a tremendous passion for that in 
the World Bank.’ As Collier (2007) writes: ‘an impoverished ghetto of 1 billion people [is] increas-
ingly impossible for a comfortable world to tolerate’.
Meeting the Sustainable Development Goal of poverty reduction
To meet the Sustainable Development Goal of reducing extreme poverty to 1% of the world’s 
population by 2030 will require high sustained growth in the poorest countries. To calculate the 
growth required to go from the 2015 poverty rate to 1%, the elasticity of the poverty rate with 
respect to the growth of per capita income needs to be determined. As a rough guide, it is esti-
mated by the World Bank (see Ravallion, 2013) that every 1% increase in per capita income leads 
to a 1.7% reduction in the poverty rate. This calculation, however, also depends on the distribution 
of income within countries. More equal countries cut poverty further and faster than unequal 
ones. In the most unequal countries, a 1% increase in income cuts the poverty rate by less than 
1%, while in more equal countries a 1% increase in income reduces the poverty rate by as much 
as 4%. Ravallion (2013) calculates that if developing countries maintain their post-2000 growth 
performance, the number of extremely poor people will fall from the current level of 900 million 
to 200 million by 2030, or 3% of the world’s population. This would be a remarkable achievement. 
To reach the 1% poverty target, however, would require an increase in household consumption of 
7.6% per annum – an unrealistically high level.
Tackling poverty from the ‘grass roots’
Poverty not only means low income and consumption, and low levels of human development 
in terms of education and healthcare, but also feelings of powerlessness, vulnerability and 
fear, because poor people are not free, and are exposed to greater risk, living on the margin of 
subsistence.
What it means to be poor is well illustrated in the World Bank’s study The Voices of the Poor 
(World Bank, 2000b), which asked 60,000 poor people in 60 countries to articulate their feelings 
about their physical and mental state. Some of the answers are contained in Case example 2.1, 
which are both moving and revealing. Feelings of helplessness, humiliation and lack of self-esteem 
are paramount.
43
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Poor people in 60 countries were asked to analyse and share their ideas of well-being (a 
good experience of life) and ‘ill-being’ (a bad experience of life). Well-being was various-
ly described as happiness, harmony, peace, freedom from anxiety, and peace of mind. 
In Russia, people say ‘well-being is a life free from daily worries about lack of money’. 
In Bangladesh, ‘to have a life free from anxiety’. In Brazil, ‘not having to go through so 
many rough spots’. People describe ill-being as lack of material things, bad experiences, 
and bad feelings about oneself. A group of young men in Jamaica ranks lack of self-con-
fidence as the second biggest impact of poverty: ‘Poverty means we don’t believe in self, 
we hardly travel out of the community – so frustrated, just locked up in a house all day.’
Although the nature of ill-being and poverty varies among locations and people –
something that policy responses must take into account – there is a striking common-
ality across countries. Not surprisingly, material well-being turns out to be very import­
ant. Lack of food, shelter and clothing is mentioned everywhere as critical. In Kenya, 
a man says: ‘Don’t ask me what poverty is because you have met it outside my house. 
Look at the house and count the number of holes. Look at my utensils and the clothes 
I am wearing. Look at everything and write what you see. What you see is poverty.’
Alongside the material, physical well-being features prominently in the character­
izations of poverty. And the two meld together when lack of food leads to ill health – or 
 
when ill health leads to an inability to earn income. People speak about the import­
ance of looking well fed. In Ethiopia, poor people say, ‘We are skinny’, ‘We are deprived 
and pale’, and speak of a life that ‘makes you older than your age’.
Security of income is also closely tied to health. But insecurity extends beyond ill 
health. Crime and violence are often mentioned by poor people. In Ethiopia, women 
say, ‘We live hour to hour’, worrying about whether it will rain. An Argentine man says, 
‘You have work, and you are fine. If not, you starve. That’s how it is.’
Two social aspects of ill-being and poverty also emerged. For many poor people, well-
being means freedom of choice and action and the power to control one’s life. A young 
woman in Jamaica says that poverty is ‘like living in jail, living in bondage, waiting to be free’.
Linked to these feelings are definitions of well-being as social well-being and com-
ments on the stigma of poverty. As an old woman in Bulgaria says: ‘To be well means 
to see your grandchildren happy and well dressed and to know that your children have 
settled down; to be able to give them food and money whenever they come to see you, 
and not to ask them for help and money.’ A Somali proverb captures the other side: 
‘Prolonged sickness and persistent poverty cause people to hate you.’
The following quotations are an illustration of what living in poverty means:
Certainly our farming is little; all the products, things bought from stores, are ex-
pensive; it is hard to live, we work and earn little money, buy few things or products; 
products are scarce, there is no money and we feel poor.
(from a discussion group of poor men and women, Ecuador)
We face a calamity when my husband falls ill. Our life comes to a halt until he recov-
ers and goes back to work.
(poor woman, Zawyet Sultan, Egypt)
Poverty is humiliation, the sense of being dependent on them, and of being forced 
to accept rudeness, insults, and indifference when we seek help. 
(poor woman, Latvia)
Source: World Bank, 2000b.
Case example 2.1
The voices of the poor
44
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The World Bank proposes a three-pronged strategy for poverty reduction: promoting oppor-
tunity, facilitating empowerment and enhancing security.
Promoting opportunity is partly about expanding economic opportunities for poor people 
through the process of economic growth, and partly about expanding the asset base of poor peo-
ple and increasing the return on those assets. The major causes of individual poverty can be linked 
to a lack of assets and/or a low return on assets. Important assets to enable people to grow out of 
poverty include natural assets, such as land; human assets, such as education and health; finan-
cial assets, including access to credit, and social assets, such as networks of contacts. The return 
on assets once acquired depends on the institutional framework of a country, the performance 
of the economy, and what is happening in the world economy. The state has a role to play in 
expanding poor people’s assets because markets do not work well for poor people owing to lack 
of access, power and collateral. The state can help in three major ways: first, by using its power to 
redistribute resources; second, through institutional reforms to deliver services more effectively, 
particularly in the fields of health and education; and third, by facilitating the engagement of poor 
people in programmes that help them to acquire assets, such as land and credit.
A growing economy is absolutely crucial for poverty reduction as emphasized by the World 
Bank’s Commission on Growth and Development headed by the Nobel Prize-winning economist 
Michael Spence (World Bank, 2008). Poverty cannot be reduced in a stagnant economy. The 
Commission finds a strong negative association across countries between the average growth of 
income and consumption and the share of people living on less than $1 per day. A 1 percentage 
point growth of income below the average is associated with a 2 percentage point increase in the 
share of people living in poverty.
On the other hand, similar rates of growth of countries are associated with different rates of 
poverty reduction. This is the result of existing inequalities in the distribution of income, assets and 
access to opportunities. Growth is much more effective in reducing poverty where the income 
distribution is more equal than where there are big inequalities. The World Bank estimates that 
when inequality is low, growth reduces poverty by nearly twice as much as when inequality is high.
Facilitating empowerment is a new departure in the thinking of the World Bank compared 
with its 1990 Report. Empowering poor people means strengthening the participation of poor 
people in decision-making, eliminating various forms of discrimination – ethnic, religious, sexual 
– and making state institutions more accountable and responsive to poor people. The great chal-
lenge here is to tackle the institutional structures of poor countries that continue to marginalize, 
discrimin­
ate against and disenfranchise vulnerable sections of society. The law, the Church, bureau-
crats and local elites, and customs and traditions all play a part. The state has a role to play in help-
ing to empower people by:
1.	 Curbing corruption and harassment, and using the power of the state to redistribute resources 
for actions benefiting the poor.
2.	 Ensuring that the legal system is fair and accessible to the poor.
3.	 Making sure that the delivery of local services is not captured by local elites.
4.	 Encouraging the participation of poor people in the political process.
5.	 Galvanizing political support for public action against poverty.
Enhancing security means reducing poor people’s vulnerability to the various forms of inse-
curity that affect people’s lives, such as economic shocks, natural disasters, crop failures, ill health, 
violence, wars and so on, and helping people to cope with these adverse shocks when they occur. 
The wide range of risks that poor people are exposed to is highlighted in Case example 2.2. This 
vulnerability to risk requires a range of insurance mechanisms for managing risk, such as health and 
45
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Poor people are exposed to a wide range of risks.
Illness and injury
Poor people often live and work in environments that expose them to greater risk of ill-
ness or injury, and they have less access to healthcare. Their health risks are strongly con-
nected to the availability of food, which is affected by almost all the risks the poor face 
(natural disasters, wars, harvest failures and food price fluctuations). Communicable 
diseases are concentrated among the poor, with respiratory infections the leading cause 
of death. A recent study of poverty in India found that the poor are 4.5 times as likely to 
contract tuberculosis as the rich and twice as likely to lose a child before the age of two.
Illness and injury in the household have direct costs (for prevention, care and cure) 
and opportunity costs (lost income or schooling while ill). The timing, duration and 
frequency of illness also affect its impact. A study of South India found that households 
can compensate for an illness during the slack agricultural season, but illness during 
the peak season leads to a heavy loss of income, especially on small farms, usually ne-
cessitating costly informal borrowing.
Old age
Many risks are associated with ageing: illness, social isolation, inability to continue 
working, and uncertainty about whether transfers will provide an adequate living. The 
incidence of poverty among the elderly varies significantly. In most Latin American 
countries, the proportion of people in poverty is lower for the elderly than for the 
population at large. In contrast, in many countries of the former Soviet Union, the inci-
dence of poverty is above average among the elderly, particularly among people 75 and 
older. Women, because of their longer life expectancy, constitute the majority of the 
elderly, and they tend to be more prone to poverty in old age than men. The number 
of elderly people in the developing world will increase significantly in coming decades 
with the rapid demographic transition.
Consultations with poor people show that income security is a prime concern of 
the elderly, followed closely by access to health services, suitable housing and the qual-
ity of family and community life. Isolation, loneliness and fear all too often mark old 
people’s lives.
Crime and domestic violence
Crime and domestic violence reduce earnings and make it harder to escape poverty. 
While the rich can hire private security guards and fortify their homes, the poor have 
few means to protect themselves against crime. In 1992 in São Paulo, Brazil, the murder 
rate for adolescent males in poor neighbourhoods was 11 times that in wealthier ones. 
Poor people frequently voice their fear of violence and the resulting powerlessness: ‘I 
do not know whom to trust, the police or the criminals.’
Crime also hurts poor people indirectly. Children exposed to violence may perform 
worse in school. A study of urban communities in Ecuador, Hungary, the Philippines 
and Zambia showed that difficult economic conditions lead to destruction of social 
capital as involvement in community organizations declines, informal ties among resi-
dents weaken, and gang violence, vandalism and crime increase. Violence and crime 
may thus deprive poor people of two of their best means of reducing vulnerability: 
human and social capital.
Case example 2.2
Poor people’s exposure to risk
continued overleaf
46
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Case example 2.2
Poor people’s exposure to risk – continued
Unemployment and other labour market risks
Labour market risks include unemployment, falling wages, and having to take up pre-
carious and low-quality jobs in the informal sector as a result of macroeconomic crises 
or policy reform. The first workers to be laid off during cutbacks in public sector jobs 
are usually those with low skills, who then join the ranks of the urban poor; a pattern 
observed in Africa and Latin America during the structural adjustment reforms of the 
1980s and early 1990s. The East Asian crisis also had pronounced effects on labour mar-
kets, with real wages and non-agricultural employment falling in all affected countries. 
As state enterprises in Eastern Europe and the countries of the former Soviet Union 
were privatized, poverty increased among displaced workers with low education and 
obsolete skills, not qualified to work in emerging industries.
Fluctuations in demand for labour often disproportionately affect women and 
young workers. Most public sector retrenchment programmes have affected women’s 
employment more than men’s, and women are more likely than men to work for small 
firms, which tend to be more sensitive to demand fluctuations. As incomes fall, poor 
households try to increase their labour market participation, especially for women and 
children.
Harvest failure and food price fluctuations
Weather-related uncertainties (mainly rainfall), plant disease and pests create har-
vest risk for all farmers, but technologies for reducing such risks (irrigation, pesticides, 
­
disease-resistant varieties) are less available in poor areas. Between 1994 and 1996, less 
than 20% of all cropland was irrigated in low- and middle-income countries (only 4% 
of such land was irrigated in sub-Saharan Africa).
Fluctuations in food prices are a related risk. Since poor households spend a large 
part of their income on food, even small price increases can severely affect food intake. 
Households that meet their food needs through subsistence agriculture are less vulner-
able than households that have to buy all their food.
Liberalization of markets often boosts the price of staples – a benefit to small farm-
ers if they are net sellers of food. Those hurt are the urban poor and the landless rural 
poor, as net food buyers, and farmers who engage in seasonal switching, selling food 
after the harvest when food is plentiful and cheap and buying it when it is scarce and 
expensive. Where transport facilities are good, traders can step in and equalize prices 
over the year through arbitrage, but such infrastructure is lacking in many areas.
Source: World Bank, 2000a.
old-age insurance, unemployment insurance and workforce programmes, social funds and cash 
transfers, microfinance programmes, insurance against crop failures and price instability and so on.
The World Bank points out, however, that promoting opportunities, facilitating empower-
ment and enhancing security are necessary conditions for tackling poverty, but not sufficient con-
ditions in an interdependent, global economy. International action is also required to help poor 
people in at least five ways:
•
• Promoting global financial stability and reducing the risks of economic crisis.
•
• Opening up markets (particularly in developed countries) to the goods of poor countries.
•
• Encouraging the production of international public goods that benefit poor people; for exam-
ple the control of disease, agricultural research and the dissemination of knowledge.

  t  5 ) &  % & 7 & - 0 1 . & / 5  ( " 1  " / %  5 ) &  . & " 4 6 3 & . & / 5  0 '  1 0 7 & 3 5 : 
 
t .PSFGPSFJHOBJEBOEEFCUSFMJFG
 
t (JWJOHBHSFBUFSWPJDFUPQPPSDPVOUSJFTBOEQFPQMFTJOUIFHMPCBMGPSVNTBOENVMUJMBUFSBMJOTUJ-
UVUJPOTPGUIFXPSMETVDIBTUIF8PSME#BOLUIF*.'BOEUIF850
3BOEPNJ[FEDPOUSPMUSJBMT	3$5T
0OFPGUIFNPTUJOUFSFTUJOHBOEVTFGVMXBZTUPmOEPVUXIJDIJTUIFNPTUFĊFDUJWFXBZUPmHIU
poverty at the micro-level is to conduct randomized control trials (RCTs), which is the approach 
UBLFOCZUIF"CEVM-BUJG1PWFSUZ"DUJPO-BCPSBUPSZTFUVQCZ"CIJKJU#BOFSKFFBOE&TUIFS%VnP
BUUIF.BTTBDIVTFUUT*OTUJUVUFPG5FDIOPMPHZJOBOEEFTDSJCFEJOUIFJSCFTUTFMMJOHCPPL
Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty	
3$5TFOBCMFBOUJ
QPWFSUZQPMJDJFTUPCFCBTFEPOTDJFOUJmDFWJEFODFSBUIFSUIBOIVODIPSDVTUPN"TUIFBVUIPST
BSHVFAJEFPMPHZJHOPSBODFBOEJOFSUJBPGUFOFYQMBJOXIZHPPEJOUFOUJPOFE<BOUJQPWFSUZ>QPMJDJFT
GBJM3FTFBSDIPċDFSTMPDBUFEJOmWFPċDFTBSPVOEUIFXPSMEIBWFDPNQMFUFEPSBSFFOHBHFEJO
PWFSFYQFSJNFOUTJONPSFUIBOGPSUZDPVOUSJFT
ʾFFTTFODFPGBO3$5JTUPUBLFBSBOEPNHSPVQPGQFPQMFPSGBNJMJFTUPDPOEVDUBOFYQFSJ-
NFOUBOEUIFOUPDPNQBSFUIFSFTVMUTPGUIFFYQFSJNFOUPOUIFHSPVQXJUIBOPUIFSSBOEPNTBN-
QMF	PSDPOUSPMHSPVQ
OPUTVCKFDUUPUIFFYQFSJNFOUBOEUPTFFXIFUIFSUIFFYQFSJNFOUMFBETUP
BTJHOJmDBOUDIBOHFJOCFIBWJPVSPSPVUDPNF'PSFYBNQMFUIFSFXBTBNJDSPDSFEJUFYQFSJNFOUJO
)ZEFSBCBE	*OEJB
POXIFUIFSNJDSPDSFEJUXPSLTUPIFMQQPPSQFPQMF'JGUZUXPOFJHICPVSIPPET
XFSFDIPTFOBUSBOEPNUPSFDFJWFNJDSPDSFEJUIFMQBOEPUIFSOFJHICPVSIPPETXFSFUBLFOBTB
DPOUSPMHSPVQ"GUFSFJHIUFFONPOUITUIFSFXBTDMFBSFWJEFODFPGNJDSPDSFEJUXPSLJOH
*OUIFmFMETPGFEVDBUJPOBOEIFBMUI3$5TTIPXUIBUmOBODJBMJODFOUJWFTXPSL*NNVOJ[BUJPO
DBNQTBHBJOTUQSFWFOUBCMFEJTFBTFTBSFWFSZTVDDFTTGVMXIFSFQFPQMFBSFSFXBSEFEGPSBUUFOEJOH
'SFFDIMPSJOFEJTQFOTFSTOFYUUPXBUFSTPVSDFTGSFFXPSNJOHQJMMTBOEGSFFOVUSJUJPOBMTVQQMF-
NFOUTBMTPAXPSL$POEJUJPOBMDBTIUSBOTGFSTUPGBNJMJFTUIBUTFOEDIJMESFOUPTDIPPMIBWFQSPWFE
FĊFDUJWFJO#SB[JM	UIF#PMTB'BNJMJBQSPHSBNNF
BOE.FYJDP	0QPSUVOJEBEFT
*OUIFmFMEPG
population control, trials show that the provision of family planning services makes very little 
EJĊFSFODFUPGFSUJMJUZVOMFTTUIFSFJTBEFNBOEGPSUIFNBOEXPNFOBSFTFFOBMPOFGPSBEWJDF
5FFOBHFQSFHOBODJFTIBWFCFFOSFEVDFEXIFSFHJSMTIBWFCFFOQSPWJEFEXJUIGSFFTDIPPMVOJGPSNT
UPTUBZJOTDIPPMSBUIFSUIBOSPBNUIFTUSFFUT
1PPSQFPQMFMJWFTVSSPVOEFECZIVHFSJTLTUPUIFJSMJWFMJIPPET	TFF$BTFFYBNQMF
BOEUIFXBZ
UIFZDPQFCZEJWFSTJGZJOHBDUJWJUJFTJTWFSZJOFċDJFOUʾFDIBMMFOHFIFSFJTGPSHPWFSONFOUTUPBTTJTU
UIFEFWFMPQNFOUPGJOTVSBODFNBSLFUTUISPVHIFEVDBUJPOBOETVCTJEJ[JOHJOTVSBODFQSFNJVNT
0OFXBZGPSQPPSQFPQMFUPFYQBOEUIFJSBTTFUCBTFJTUPCPSSPXCVUGSPNNPOFZMFOEFSTJU
JTFYQFOTJWFBOEUIFGPSNBMCBOLJOHTZTUFNJTOPUJOUFSFTUFEJOMFOEJOHUPUIFQPPSXJUIOPDPM-
MBUFSBMʾJTJTUIFDIBMMFOHFPGUIFNJDSPDSFEJUNPWFNFOU	TFF$IBQUFS
ʾFBMUFSOBUJWFUP
CPSSPXJOHGPSJOWFTUNFOUJTQSJPSTBWJOHBOE3$5TTIPXUIFJNQPSUBOUSPMFUIBUNPCJMFQIPOF
banking can play in encouraging small saving and dealing with small accounts.
ʾFTFBSFKVTUTPNFPGUIFmFMETJOXIJDI3$5TIBWFUBLFOQMBDF8IJMFUIFSFTVMUTDBOCFJOUFS-
FTUJOHUIFSFBSFMJNJUBUJPOTPGTVDIUSJBMTJOQBSUJDVMBSJUNBZCFEJċDVMUUPHFOFSBMJ[FUIFSFTVMUT
PG3$5TCFDBVTFUIFZBSFDPOUFYUTQFDJmD&WBMVBUJPONBZCFDPOEVDUFEPOPOMZPOFTQFDJmD
sample, the trial may be implemented in such a way that it cannot be replicated, and if a speciﬁc 
QSPHSBNNFJTJNQMFNFOUFEBTMJHIUMZEJĊFSFOUQSPHSBNNFNBZOPUIBWFUIFTBNFSFTVMUT"MTP
the evaluation of a trial itself may cause both treatment and comparison groups to alter their 
CFIBWJPVSGPSUIFQFSJPEPGUIFFYQFSJNFOUMFBEJOHUPGBMTFJOGFSFODFT
48
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Notwithstanding these limitations, and that the trials are generally small scale, RCTs are begin-
ning to make a major contribution to our understanding of the causes of poverty, the solution 
to poverty (what works and what does not), and what types of incentives poor people need to 
improve their health, value education and escape from the poverty trap.
Human Development Index (HDI)
To overcome the limitation of taking a single measure of PCY as an index of development and 
the problems of using PCY as a measure of living standards, the UNDP has developed the Human 
Development Index (HDI). This index gives a measure of the economic well-being of nations that 
does not necessarily accord with the usual measure: the level of per capita income. As the UNDP 
says in its Human Development Report (2014): ‘although GNP growth is absolutely necessary to 
meet all essential human objectives, countries differ in the way that they translate growth into 
human development’. The UNDP defines human development as ‘a process of enlarging peoples’ 
choices’. This depends not only on income but also on other social indicators such as life expect­
ancy, health, education and literacy.
Originally, the HDI was based on three variables: life expectancy at birth; educational attain-
ment measured by a combination of adult literacy (two-thirds weight) and combined primary, 
secondary and tertiary school enrolment ratios (one-third); and the standard of living measured 
by real PCY at PPP. An arithmetic average was taken of the three indices calculated. In 2010, the 
construction of the index changed. First, some of the variables changed, and second, the method 
of aggregation changed from an arithmetic average of the indexes to a geometric mean. The vari-
ables for the construction of the HDI are:
•
• Life expectancy at birth
•
• Educational attainment measured as the arithmetic mean of the average years of schooling, 
and expected years of schooling
•
• Gross national income per head at PPP.
These four variables are shown in columns 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Table 2.6 for 10 countries with very high 
human development, 10 countries with high human development, 10 countries with medium 
human development, and 10 countries with the very lowest human development, and also for 
regions of the world. To construct the index, fixed minimum and maximum values are taken for 
each of the variables. For life expectancy at birth, the range is 20–85 years. For average years of 
schooling, the range is from 0–15 years. For expected years of schooling, the range is 0–18 years. 
For per capita income at PPP, the range is from $100–$75,000 (taking logs). For any component of 
the HDI, the individual indexes can be computed according to the general formula:
Index 5  Actual value 2  Minimum value
Maximum value 2 Minimum value
(2.1)
Each index thus ranges from zero to 1. If the actual value of the variable is the minimum, the index 
is zero. If the actual value of the variable is equal to the maximum value, the index is one. Case 
example 2.3 shows how the index is calculated for Costa Rica.
There is not always a close correspondence between the ranking of countries by their HDI 
and their ranking by per capita income. For example, many of the oil-producing countries, such 
as Qatar, Kuwait, Angola and Equatorial Guinea have much lower HDI rankings than per capita 
income rankings because they don’t use their riches for education and health, while countries 
49
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Table 2.6  Human Development Index and its components, 2013
HDI rank
Country
Human 
Development 
Index 2013
Life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)
Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)
Expected 
years of 
schooling 
(years)
Gross 
national 
income per 
capita, PPP$
Very high human development
1
Norway
0.944
81.5
12.6
17.6
63,909
2
Australia
0.933
82.5
12.8
19.9
41,524
3
Switzerland
0.917
82.6
12.2
15.7
53,762
4
Netherlands
0.915
81.0
11.9
17.9
42,397
5
United States
0.914
78.9
12.9
16.5
52,308
6
Germany
0.911
80.7
12.9
16.3
43,049
7
New Zealand
0.910
81.1
12.5
19.4
32,569
8
Canada
0.902
81.5
12.3
15.9
41,887
9
Singapore
0.901
82.3
10.2
15.4
72,371
10
Denmark
0.900
79.4
12.1
16.9
42,880
High human development
50
Uruguay
0.790
77.2
8.5
15.5
18,108
51
Bahamas
0.789
75.2
10.9
12.6
21,414
51
Montenegro
0.789
74.8
10.50
15.2
14,710
53
Belarus
0.786
69.9
11.50
15.7
16,403
54
Romania
0.785
73.8
10.7
14.1
17,433
55
Libya
0.784
75.3
7.5
16.1
21,666
56
Oman
0.783
76.6
6.8
13.6
42,191
57
Russian 
Federation
0.778
68.0
11.7
14.0
22,617
58
Bulgaria
0.777
73.5
10.6
14.3
15,402
59
Barbados
0.776
75.4
9.4
15.4
13,604
60
Palau
0.775
72.4
12.2
13.7
12.823
Medium human development
103
Maldives
0.698
77.9
5.8 b
12.7
10,074
103
Mongolia
0.698
67.5
8.3
15.0
8,466
103
Turkmenistan
0.698
65.5
9.9 s
12.6 p
11,533
106
Samoa
0.694
73.2
10.3
12.9 t
4,708
107
Palestine, State 
of
0.686
73.2
8.90
13.2
5,168
108
Indonesia
0.684
70.8
7.5
12.7
8,970
109
Botswana
0.683
64.4
8.8
11.7
14,792
110
Egypt
0.682
71.2
6.4
13.0
10,400
111
Paraguay
0.676
72.3
7.7
11.9
7,580
112
Gabon
0.674
63.5
7.4
12.3
16,977
continued overleaf
50
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
HDI rank
Country
Human 
Development 
Index 2013
Life 
expectancy at 
birth (years)
Mean years 
of schooling 
(years)
Expected 
years of 
schooling 
(years)
Gross 
national 
income per 
capita, PPP$
Lowest human development
178
Mozambique
0.393
50.3
3.2
9.5
1,011
179
Guinea
0.392
56.1
1.6
8.7
1,142
180
Burundi
0.389
54.1
2.7
10.1
749
181
Burkina Faso
0.388
56.3
1.3
7.5
1,602
182
Eritrea
0.381
62.9
3.4
4.1
1,147
183
Sierra Leone
0.374
45.6
2.9
7.5
1,815
184
Chad
0.372
51.2
1.5
7.4
1,622
185
Central African 
Republic
0.341
50.2
3.5
7.2
588
186
Congo, 
Democratic 
Republic of the
0.338
50.0
3.1
9.7
444
187
Niger
0.337
58.4
1.4
5.4
873
Regions
Arab States
0.682
70.2
6.3
11.8
15,817
East Asia and the 
Pacific
0.703
74.0
74
12.5
10,499
Europe and 
Central Asia
0.738
71.3
9.6
13.6
12,415
Latin America and 
the Caribbean
0.740
74.9
7.9
13.7
13,767
South Asia
0.588
67.2
4.7
11.2
5,195
Sub-Saharan 
Africa
0.502
56.8
4.8
9.7
3,152
Least developed 
countries
0487
61.5
3.9
94
2,126
Small island 
developing states
0.665
70.0
7.5
11.0
9,471
World
0.702
70.8
7.7
12.2
13,723
Source: UNDP, 2014.
Table 2.6 Human Development Index and its components, 2013 – continued
such as Bangladesh, the Philippines, Ghana, Peru, Cuba and some of the Pacific Islands have high 
HDI rankings compared with per capita income because they invest in human development– 
education and health.
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)
Poverty is not only about lack of income and low levels of education and health. It has many 
other dimensions. This is recognized by the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), developed 
by Alkire and Santos (2010) with the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, and 
51
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Case example 2.3
Calculating the HDI for Costa Rica
published by the UNDP’s Human Development Report since 2010. It represents an internationally 
comparable measure of acute poverty covering more than one hundred developing countries. 
Three main dimensions of poverty are identified – education, health and standard of living – 
and each has various indicators, as shown in Table 2.7. In total, there are 10 indicators with their 
weights attached. Data on each indicator are collected at the household level and a person is 
identified as poor if they are deprived of at least one-third of the weighted indices. This is the 
cut-off point (c). In other words, if c is greater than 33.3%, the household (and everyone in it) is 
multidimensionally poor. If c is greater than 50%, the household is ‘severely poor’.
The MPI index is the product of two measures: the multidimensional headcount ratio (H) and 
the intensity (or breadth) of poverty (A). The headcount ratio is the proportion of the population 
that is multidimensionally poor:
H 5 q/n
(2.2)
where q is the number of people who are multidimensionally poor and n is the total population. 
The intensity of poverty (A) is the sum (for poor households only) of the household deprivation 
•
• Life expectancy at birth in Costa Rica is 79.93 years
•
• Mean years of schooling is 8.37
•
• Expected years of schooling is 13.50
•
• Gross national income per capita at PPP is $13,011.7
Now plug these values into the general formula, equation 2.1 above, to derive an index 
(I) for each of the variables.
	
Health index 5  79.93 2 20
85 2 20  5 0.922
	
Mean year of schooling index 5   8.37 2 0
15 2 0  5 0.558
	
Expected years of schooling Index 5   13.50
18  5 0.750
	
Education index 5   0.558 1 0.750
2
 5 0.654
	
Income index 5   ln (13,011.7) 2 ln (100)
ln (75,000) 2 ln (100)  5 0.735
The HDI is the geometric mean of each of the three indexes:
	
HDI 5 (Ihealth 3 Ieducation 3 Iincome)1/3
where the education index is the mean of the two education variables.
The HDI for Costa Rica is therefore:
	
(0.922 3 0.654 3 0.735)1/3 5 0.763
This ranks Costa Rica 68th in the world, which puts it in the high human development 
category – but as we saw in Case example 1.1, it ranks much higher on other indexes 
of economic development and happiness. It is brought down by its relatively low level 
of per capita income compared with its educational performance and life expectancy.
Source: UNDP, 2014.
52
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Table 2.7  Multidimensional Poverty Index and its components, 2014
Dimensions of poverty
Indicator
Deprived if …
Weight
Education
Year of Schooling
No household member has completed five years of 
schooling.
  1/6
Child School Attendance
Any school-aged child is not attending school up to 
class 8.
  1/6
Health
Child Mortality
Any child has died in the family
  1/6
Nutrition
Any adult or child for whom there is nutritional 
information is malnourished.
  1/6
Living Standard
Electricity
The household has no electricity.
1/18
Improved Sanitation
The household’s sanitation facility is not improved 
(according to MDG guidelines), or it is improved but 
shared with other households.
1/18
Improved Drinking Water
The household does not have access to improved 
drinking water (according to MDG guidelines) or safe 
drinking water is more than a 30-minute walk from 
home, roundtrip.
1/18
Flooring
The household has a dirt, sand or dung floor.
1/18
Cooking Fuel
The household cooks with dung, wood or charcoal.
1/18
Assets Ownership
The household does not own more than one radio, TV, 
telephone, bike, motorbike or refrigerator and does not 
own a car or truck.
1/18
Source: UNDP, 2014.
scores multiplied by the number of people in the household divided by the total number of poor 
people (q):
A 5
a
h
cjhi
q

(2.3)
where cj is the deprivation score of the household, i is the number of people in the household, and 
h is the number of households.
Let us give a numerical example. Table 2.8 gives data for four households with different num-
bers of people in each.
Take household 1 with 4 persons. In only two categories is it ‘poor’: one or more children have 
died (weight 0.167), and the household uses only ‘dirty’ cooking (weight 0.056). The sum of the 
deprivation scores is 22.2%, which is less than the cut-off of 33.3%, so the household is not poor. 
By the same calculations, households 2, 3 are 4 are poor. For all these poor households, the head-
count ratio (H), applying equation (2.2), is:
H 5  
(7 1 5 1 4)
(4 1 7 1 5 1 4)  5 0.800
The intensity of poverty (A) (for households that are poor) is:
A 5  (72.2)7 1 (38.9)5 1 (50.0)4 
(7 1 4 1 5)
 5 0.563
53
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
Table 2.8  Hypothetical household data
Households
Weights
Indicators
  1
  2
  3
  4
Household size
  4
  7
  5
  4
Education
No one has completed five years of schooling
  0
  1
  0
  1
16.7%
At least one school-age child not enrolled in school
  0
  1
  0
  0
16.7%
Health
At least one member is malnourished
  0
  0
  1
  0
16.7%
One or more children have died
  1
  1
  0
  1
16.7%
Living conditions
No electricity
  0
  1
  1
  1
  5.6%
No access to clean drinking water
  0
  0
  1
  0
  5.6%
No access to adequate sanitation
  0
  1
  1
  0
  5.6%
House has dirt floor
  0
  0
  0
  0
  5.6%
Household uses ‘dirty’ cooking fuel (dung, firewood or charcoal)
  1
  1
  1
  1
  5.6%
Household has no car and owns at most one of: bicycle. motorcycle, 
radio, refrigerator telephone or television
  0
  1
  0
  1
  5.6%
Results
Household deprivation score, c (sum of each deprivation multiplied by 
its weight)
22%
72.2%
38.9%
50.0%
Is the household poor (c . 33.3%)?
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note: 1 indicates deprivation in the indicator; 0 indicates non-deprivation
Source: UNDP, 2014.
that is, the average poor person is deprived in 56.3% of the weighted indicators. The MPI index 
 
(H 3 A) is therefore: MPI 5 0.8 3 0.563 5 0.490.
The index can be compared over time and across countries, and the different contributions of 
education, health and the standard of living deprivation to the total index can also be calculated. 
There is a close correlation between the ranking of countries by their MPI and their HDI. Table 2.9 
below gives countries where more than 50% of the population live in multidimensional poverty. 
The total number of people living in multidimensional poverty in the 28 countries listed is nearly 
400 million out of a total of nearly 800 million overall. This latter figure is less than the number of 
individuals living on less than $1.90 a day because typically a family consists of more than one per-
son so that family income is more than $1.90 a day. The MPI does not take account of income – 
 
only the consequences of a lack of income.
Can poor countries ever catch up?
If living standards are largely determined by the level and growth of productivity, the interesting 
question is whether developing countries will ever catch up with the performance of rich indus-
trialized countries. There are at least three possible mechanisms by which catch-up may occur:
1.	 It is sometimes argued that the larger the gap between a poor country’s technology, product­
ivity and per capita income and the level of productivity in advanced countries, the greater 
54
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Table 2.9  Countries with more than 50% of the population living in multidimensional poverty
Country
% of population
No. of people (000)
Afghanistan
66.2
17,116
Bangladesh
51.2
75,610
Benin
71.8
5,897
Burkina Faso
84.0
12,875
Burundi
80.8
7,553
Central African Republic
77.6
332
D.R. Congo
74.0
46,278
Cote d’Ivoire
58.7
11,772
Ethiopia
87.3
78,887
Gambia
60.4
901
Guinea
82.5
8,278
Guinea-Bissau
77.5
1,168
India
53.7
63,199
Liberia
83.9
2,883
Madagascar
66.9
15,774
Malawi
66.7
10,012
Mali
86.6
10,545
Mauritania
61.7
2,197
Mozambique
69.6
17,246
Niger
89.3
15,408
Rwanda
69.0
7,669
Senegal
74.4
9,247
Sierra Leone
72.5
4,180
Somalia
81.2
7,106
Tanzania
65.6
29,842
Uganda
69.9
24,712
Yemen
52.5
7,714
Zambia
64.2
7,600
Source: UNDP, 2014.
the scope for a poor country to absorb existing technology and catch up with richer countries. 
Technology is thought of as a public good, so for a given amount of technological investment, a 
poor country can reap high returns because it has paid none of the development costs. Clearly, 
there also has to be the willingness and ability to invest and the capability to absorb new tech-
nology. A productivity gap is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for catch-up by this 
means.
2.	 The process of development is characterized by a shift of resources from low-productivity ag-
riculture to higher productivity industrial and service activities. Other things being equal, this 
should also produce a move towards convergence, to the extent that the resource shifts are 
greater in poor countries than in rich countries.
3.	 Mainstream neoclassical growth theory predicts convergence (see Chapter 4) because of the 
assumption of diminishing returns to capital. Rich countries with a lot of capital per head will 
55
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
have a lower productivity of capital than poor countries. Thus, if tastes and preferences are 
the same, the same amount of saving and investment in poor countries should lead to faster 
growth than in rich countries.
The standard procedure for testing the convergence hypothesis is to do a simple correlation 
across countries between the rate of growth of per capita income (y) as the dependent variable 
and the initial level of per capita income (or productivity) as the independent variable, and to see 
whether the relation is significantly negative. If it is, this means that per capita income is growing 
faster in poor countries than in rich countries, which is a necessary condition for convergence to 
take place (often called beta convergence in the literature). One of the earliest studies of this type 
(Baumol, 1986) showed a strong inverse correlation between a country’s productivity level and 
its average productivity growth among industrial countries and those at an intermediate stage of 
development, but no evidence of convergence as far as the poorer countries are concerned.
Zind (1991) focused on 89 developing countries and regressed the rate of growth of per capita 
income on the level of per capita income in 1960. He could find no evidence of overall conver-
gence, but there was some evidence of convergence taking place between countries with rela-
tively high per capita incomes. One reason appears to be that in these latter countries, there was 
a positive relation between per capita income and the rate of growth of investment per capita.
Another study by Dowrick (1992) across 113 countries showed that while there was some evi-
dence of catch-up in the 1970s and 1980s, in the sense that growth rates were negatively related 
to initial levels of productivity, other factors caused per capita income growth to be faster the 
higher the level of per capita income, producing a divergence of living standards across the world.
Similarly, Pritchett (1997) takes 117 countries over the period 1960–88 and regresses the rate 
of growth of per capita income on the initial level of per capita income relative to the leading 
country and finds no evidence of unconditional convergence. It is interesting to note, however, 
that when differences in investment and schooling between countries are allowed for, the coef-
ficient becomes negative, indicating conditional convergence. The problem is, however, that rich 
countries are able to save and invest more, and they devote more resources to education, which 
perpetuates their growth advantage.
It has been argued by some (see Eichengreen et al., 2011) that when poor countries reach 
middle-income status, they may get caught in a so-called middle-income trap, meaning that they 
exhaust the potential for fast growth which leads to middle-income status, and then they lack the 
capability to make the next step to high-income status. The fast growth stage is associated with 
the shift of resources from agriculture to higher productivity sectors, and then growth slows down 
because of a fall in total productivity growth, and countries lack the capability to produce higher 
value-added goods necessary to achieve developed country status. It is true that econ­
omies are 
unlikely to sustain growth rates of 6–10% per annum, as China has done over the past 30 years, 
but as long as per capita income growth is positive, poor countries will ultimately become rich, 
and if the growth of per capita income exceeds that of developed countries, there will ultimately 
be convergence. It is debatable, therefore, whether a middle-income trap exists in practice.
But an interesting question then arises: How long it will take for poor countries to catch up 
with the rich? Let us consider two issues:
1.	 Given the recent growth experience of the poor countries of roughly 3% per annum, how long 
will it take for the average poor country to reach the current average living standards of rich 
developed countries?
2.	 How long will it take for poor countries to catch up with rich countries, assuming that rich 
countries grow at 3% per annum and poor countries were to raise their per capita growth to 
56
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
4% per annum. (Clearly, a necessary condition for catch-up is that poor countries do grow 
faster than rich countries, otherwise convergence is impossible.)
We can answer both questions using the simple compound interest formula:
S 5 P(1 1 r)n
where P is the ‘initial’ income level, and S is the sum to which the income level grows at an annual 
compound rate of interest, r, over n years.
The answer to the first question, assuming that the current level of per capita income in poor 
countries (P) is $1,200 per annum, and in rich countries (S) it is $25,000, and the recent growth 
performance of poor countries (r) has been 2% per annum, is that it would take 153 years for poor 
countries to reach the current standard of living of rich countries.1
The answer to the second question is that it would take nearly 300 years for the average poor 
country growing at 4% per annum to catch up with the rich country growing at 3% per annum, 
given the initial difference in the level of per capita incomes.2
The above calculations are sensitive to the initial income levels taken and the assumed future 
growth rates of poor and rich countries, but it is difficult not to reach the conclusion that the 
timescale of catch-up will be extremely prolonged.
It can be argued, of course, that world income equality is an impracticable ideal, and that 
the primary aim is not equality of living standards throughout the world but ‘tolerable’ living 
standards in all countries, which is a very different matter. This seems to be the position of the 
World Bank, which argued in its World Development Report 2000/2001 that rising income inequal-
ity ‘should not be seen as a negative’, provided that incomes at the bottom do not fall, and the 
number of people in poverty falls or does not rise (World Bank, 2000a). The problem is defining 
‘tolerable’ living standards, and specifying an acceptable income distribution at that average level 
of real income. The timescale involved to reach ‘tolerable’ living standards is clearly less than that 
required to eliminate the income gap entirely, but even so, if the average level of per capita income 
now enjoyed in rich developed countries is regarded as the tolerable level, we estimate it will take 
over a century for the average poor country to attain it on current performance. Can these coun-
tries wait that long?
On the other hand, it is easily forgotten that the rich–poor country divide in the world econ-
omy is a relatively recent phenomenon. All countries were once at subsistence level, and as recently 
as 200 years ago, at the advent of the British Industrial Revolution, the absolute differences in 
living standards between countries cannot have been great. The average per capita income of 
low-income countries today is approximately $1,500 per annum at PPP, and this is not far below 
the average level of real per capita income in Western Europe in the mid-nineteenth century, 
measured at current prices. If we regard $1,500 as only barely above subsistence, the major part 
of the present income disparities between developed and developing countries must have arisen 
over the twentieth century. Some countries, through a combination of fortune and design, have 
managed to grow much faster than others. The overriding influence has been industrialization 
and the technological progress associated with it. The close association between industrialization 
and living standards spells out the clear policy message that to base a development policy on 
agricultural activities alone would be misguided, however attractive such aphorisms as ‘back to 
the land’ and ‘small is beautiful’ may sound.
The concentrated impact of industrialization on living standards in the Western world is dra-
matically emphasized by the observation that if 6,000 years of ‘civilized’ human existence prior 
to 1850 is viewed as a day, the last century or so represents little more than half an hour; yet in 
this ‘half-hour’, more real output has been produced in developed countries than in the preceding 
57
2  •  T H E  D E V E L O P M E N T  G A P  A N D  T H E  M E A S U R E M E N T  O F  P O V E R T Y  
period. It is true that living standards in most developing countries have risen faster since 1950 than 
at any time in the past; but so too have the living standards in developed countries, and the gap 
between rich and poor countries continues to widen. Although development consists of more than 
a rise in per capita incomes, income disparities are the essence of the so-called ‘development gap’.
Summary
•
• The development gap between rich and poor countries is huge. The absolute gap between 
the per capita income (PCY) of rich and poor countries is growing, and the ratio of the PCY of 
high-income developed countries to low-income developing countries is currently at a histor­
ical high of 60:1.
•
• The Gini ratio for international inequality has risen from 0.2 in 1820 to over 0.5. The Gini ratio 
for global inequality has risen from 0.5 in 1820 to over 0.6 today.
•
• This income gap and income inequality in the world economy manifests itself in other aspects 
of human welfare such as health, nutrition, life expectancy, education and employment oppor-
tunities (see Chapter 7). No wonder the UNDP (1997) has described the world as ‘gargantuan 
in its excesses and grotesque in its human and economic inequalities’.
•
• The number of people living in the world on less than US$1.90 at PPP is 900 million. In Africa, 
nearly one-half of the population live on less than $1.90 a day.
•
• The average PCY of countries, even converted into PPP, is not always a good indicator of the 
development of a country, because it ignores the distribution of income and various aspects of 
human development such as education and health.
•
• Alternative measures of economic development and progress can be constructed such as the 
HDI and the MPI, which include measures of schooling, literacy, health, life expectancy and so 
on. Countries rank differently by PCY, HDI and MPI.
•
• The World Bank attempts to tackle poverty from the ‘grass roots’ by promoting opportunity, 
facilitating empowerment and enhancing economic security.
•
• At current rates of PCY growth in poor countries, it will take at least 100 years for the average 
poor country to reach the current living standards enjoyed by developed countries, and 300 
years for living standards to be equalized. This is some measure of the development ‘gap’.
1.	 How would you measure the development gap in the world economy?
2.	 How would you construct a Lorenz curve and calculate the Gini ratio for the 
measurement of income inequality?
3.	 What has been happening to the international and global distribution of income 
over time?
4.	 What difficulties arise in measuring and comparing the per capita incomes of 
poor countries using the US$ as the unit of account?
5.	 What do you understand by the concept of purchasing power parity (PPP), and 
how would you make PPP calculations of per capita income across countries?
Discussion questions
Chapter 2
58
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
6.	 What difficulties are encountered in the measurement of poverty?
7.	 What is the World Bank’s ‘grass roots’ thinking concerning the attack on world poverty?
8.	 What are the strengths and weaknesses of randomized control trials (RCTs)?
9.	 What is the rationale for the UNDP to construct the Human Development Index (HDI)?
10.	 What variables are included in the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)?
11.	 Are there any theoretical reasons for supposing that poor countries might catch 
up with the rich countries?
12.	 How would you analyse how fast poor countries have to grow to catch up with 
the rich countries?
Discussion questions – continued
Chapter 2
Notes
1. Rearranging the formula for compound interest gives:
n 5   log (S/P)
log (1 1 r)
and applying the assumed values gives:
n 5  log ($25,000/$1,200)
log (1.02)
  5 153 years
2.	 The solution is obtained from the expression:
Sr (1 1 rr )n 5 Pp(1 1 rp)n
where Sr is the initial income of rich countries; Pp is the initial income of poor countries; rr is the 
assumed growth rate of the rich country (5 3%) and rp is the assumed growth rate of the poor 
country (5 4%). Therefore:
n 5  log ($25,000/$1,200)
log (1.04) 2 log(1.03)  5 287  years
Websites on poverty and income distribution
World Bank www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty
UNDP (Human Development Report) http://hdr.undp.org
Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative www.ophi.org.uk/
Oxfam www.oxfam.org.uk
War on Want www.waronwant.org
UNU-WIDER www.wider.unu.edu/project/wiid-%E2%80%93-world-income-inequality-database
Stone Center on Socio-economic Inequality www.gc.cuny.edu/stonecenter
University of Texas, Inequality Project utip.lbj.utexas.edu
