141
•
• Introduction
•
• The role of agriculture in development
•
• Barriers to agricultural development
•
• Land reform
•
• The supply response of agriculture
•
• Transforming traditional agriculture
•
• The growth of the money economy
•
• Finance for traditional agriculture
•
• The interdependence of agriculture and industry
•
• Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour
•
• A model of the complementarity between agriculture and industry
•
• Rural–urban migration and urban unemployment
•
• Disguised unemployment: types and measurement
•
• Incentives and the costs of labour transfer
•
• Summary
•
• Appendix: the functioning of markets in agrarian societies
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Notes
•
• Websites on agriculture
THE ROLE OF AGRICULTURE 
AND SURPLUS LABOUR FOR 
INDUSTRIALIZATION
5
142
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Introduction
The task of a true theory of economic growth and development must be to explain why some 
societies developed sooner than others, why some societies have experienced such rapid increases 
in living standards while others have lagged behind, and why development has not spread more 
evenly across the globe.
The answer must be that at different stages of development, different constraints on progress 
operate. While some of these factors are likely to be sociological and political, the major con-
straints are likely to be economic. One of the most critical factors in the early stages of develop-
ment is the health of the agricultural sector, because without a surplus of food production over 
subsistence needs, little else can be done. There would be no surplus labour, no saving, no invest-
ment and no food to feed labour working in alternative activities.
It is no coincidence that the material progress of mankind started 8,000 years ago in the region 
of Mesopotamia (the cradle of civilization, now Iraq), where, for the first time, agriculture became 
settled. Unless agriculture is settled, there is no prospect of agricultural productivity increasing to 
provide the basis for the development of non-agricultural activities, the building of cities and the 
enjoyment of leisure. Where shifting agriculture is practised, as by nomadic tribes in the Kalahari 
Desert of Botswana and Namibia, for example, there is no basis for an agricultural surplus.
As the World Bank says in its World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development 
(World Bank, 2007):
agricultural growth was the precursor to the industrial revolutions that spread across the tem-
perate world from England in the mid-18th century to Japan in the late-19th century. More 
recently, rapid agricultural growth in China, India and Vietnam was the precursor to the rise of 
industry . . . the special powers of agriculture as the basis for early growth are well established.
In many developing countries today, agriculture is still extremely backward. Low productivity 
is a major cause of poverty and retards development of the whole economy. Over 3 billion people 
live in rural areas, and most of them live in households engaged in agriculture earning just a few 
dollars a day. The World Bank (2007) recognizes ‘that agriculture must be a prominent part of 
the development agenda whether for delivering growth in the agricultural-based countries or for 
reducing rural poverty’. It also recognizes that the state has a role to play in providing core public 
goods and incentives for investment in the agricultural sector.
In this chapter, we consider some of the reasons for agricultural backwardness, and why prod­
uctivity is so low. We look at the process of transforming traditional agriculture and the growth 
of the money economy, and model the interrelationship between the growth of agriculture and 
industry. Then, we use Arthur Lewis’s (1954) well-known model of economic development with 
unlimited supplies of labour to illustrate the important role that surplus labour in agriculture 
(and other sectors) plays in the development process and in fuelling industrial growth. The precise 
meaning of surplus labour is addressed, as well as the rural–urban migration process. An appen-
dix describes the various markets in agrarian societies – land, labour and credit – and how they 
interlock.
The role of agriculture in development
Agriculture makes four major contributions to the process of economic development: a product, 
a factor, a market and a foreign exchange contribution.
143
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
Product contribution
The product contribution of agriculture refers to the fact that agriculture must supply food above 
subsistence needs in order to feed labour working in alternative occupations. If other sectors of 
the economy are to be developed, labour needs to be fed, and this cannot be done by imports 
until export activities have been developed to provide foreign exchange to pay for the imports. 
It will be remembered from Chapter 3 that in Rostow’s model of economic growth, the take-
off stage of development must be preceded by an agricultural revolution. Indeed, as mentioned 
above in the quote from the World Bank, one of the major reasons why Britain was the first coun-
try to industrialize was that it was the first to experience a significant agricultural revolution based 
on the abolition of serfdom and on the enclosure movement, which raised agricultural productiv-
ity and provided surplus labour and food to support industrial expansion.
The difference between total agricultural output and subsistence needs is called the mar-
ketable surplus. Economic progress in the early stages of development requires an increase 
in the marketable surplus, which, in turn, requires an increase in labour productivity. If prod­
uctivity does not increase naturally or ‘voluntarily’, a marketable surplus can be forcibly 
extracted, as it was in Japan at the time of the Meiji Restoration in 1868, when landowners 
were compulsorily taxed, and more dramatically in the Soviet Union in the 1920s, when there 
was mass genocide of the kulaks (small prosperous landowners) during Stalin’s collectiviza-
tion programme.
‘Marketable surplus’ is an important concept in the neoclassical model of the development 
process, because unless the marketable surplus rises as the demand for food increases, the price of 
food will tend to rise. This will turn the terms of trade against industry, higher wages will have to 
be paid to workers in industry, which will eat into profits and capital accumulation. The market-
able surplus therefore becomes the major constraint on industrial growth.
Factor contribution
The factor contribution of agriculture consists of two parts: a labour contribution and a capi-
tal contribution. Labour for industry and other activities must come from agriculture, but can 
be released only if productivity in agriculture rises. The existence of surplus labour (or disguised 
unemployment) plays a major role in the development process, as we shall see when we consider 
the Lewis model of economic development with unlimited supplies of labour. The lower the cost 
of industrial labour, the faster the rate of industrial expansion is likely to be, but this depends on 
the rate at which the agricultural sector is releasing labour. Industrial development today in many 
of the rapidly growing countries of Southeast Asia is being fuelled by cheap labour drawn from 
agriculture. In this respect, China’s industrial potential is enormous.
Agriculture is a source of saving and capital accumulation for industrial development. The sav-
ing can be voluntary or involuntary. Examples of voluntary saving are rich landlords voluntarily 
investing in industrial activities (the Industrial Revolution in Britain was partly financed in this 
way), and peasant farmers investing small savings in rural banks. Involuntary saving could take 
the form of the government taxing the agricultural sector and using the proceeds for investment, 
or, more drastically, the forced extraction of the agricultural surplus through expropriation or col-
lectivization (as in Stalinist Russia).
Another traditional way in which governments have taxed the agricultural sector is through 
the pricing policies of marketing boards, established to market agricultural produce. The prices 
paid to farmers are lower than the prices at which the goods are sold on the market – the differ-
ence providing net revenue to the government.
144
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
The general policy in developing countries of keeping agricultural prices low used to be justified 
on two main grounds: that low prices benefit the industrial sector, and that peasant farmers have 
limited horizons and do not respond to incentives, so if prices are higher, they may actually produce 
less if all they are interested in is a fixed money income. This is the notion of a backward-bending 
supply curve of effort. It can be said without hesitation that the deliberate policy of keeping agri-
cultural prices low has done enormous damage to the agricultural sector in developing countries. As 
we shall see later, there is ample evidence that peasant farmers do respond to price incentives. They 
not only increase supply in response to price rises, but also switch crops as relative prices change.
Market contribution
The market contribution of agriculture refers to the fact that the demand from agriculture must 
be the major source of autonomous demand for industrial goods. If industry is to grow and pros-
per, it must be able to sell its goods. In the early stages of development, the agricultural sector is 
likely to provide the largest market for industrial goods. There is a complementarity between agri-
cultural and industrial growth. This is well documented in the historical experience of developed 
countries, and in the contemporary world economy. In his classic study of Japanese economic 
development, Lockwood (1954) wrote:
The growth of primary production was interrelated with industrialization and urbanization 
at every point . . . As industry developed, it offered a widening market for the food and raw 
material surpluses of the countryside . . . On the other hand, the increasing productivity of the 
primary industries created a growing home market for manufactures and services.
The World Development Report 1979 (World Bank, 1979) noted that ‘a stagnant rural econ-
omy with low purchasing power holds back industrial growth in many developing countries’. 
The World Development Report 1982 (World Bank, 1982) documented the close correspondence 
across countries between agricultural development and industrial growth: ‘fast growth of indus-
try and sluggish agriculture were evident only in countries with oil or mineral-based economies, 
such as Algeria, Ecuador, Mexico, Morocco and Nigeria . . . These were exceptions but they prove 
the rule.’ In other words, a precondition for rapid industrial growth is a rapidly expanding agricul-
tural sector, at least in terms of purchasing power.
This has implications for the pricing of agricultural goods relative to industrial goods, or what 
is called the agricultural (or industrial) terms of trade. Low farm prices are good for industry from 
the point of view of supply potential, because this means that industry can obtain cheaper raw 
material inputs and wage goods, which increases profitability. On the other hand, low farm prices 
are bad for industry from the demand side, because this means low farm purchasing power and 
therefore a lower demand for industrial goods. There needs to be an equilibrium terms of trade 
between the two sectors to achieve balanced growth between the two sectors, so that indus-
trial growth is not constrained from the supply side by agricultural prices being too high or con-
strained from the demand side by agricultural prices being too low. Later in the chapter, we bring 
the two sectors together in an equilibrium framework and derive the equilibrium terms of trade 
that maximizes the growth rate of the economy as a whole.
Foreign exchange contribution
In the early stages of development, the only source of foreign exchange is likely to be primary 
commodity exports. Agriculture therefore makes an important foreign exchange contribution. 
Foreign exchange is a resource, just like savings. It provides access to goods that either cannot be 
145
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
produced domestically or can be produced only at higher cost in an opportunity cost sense. Either 
way, the imports made possible by exporting agricultural products will be very ­
productive – the 
more so if they are investment-type goods necessary for the development process. There are 
not many countries in the world that could not grow faster, given the greater availability of for-
eign exchange. The link between trade, the balance of payments and growth is explored fully in 
Chapters 15 and 16.
Barriers to agricultural development
For the agricultural sector to supply food, release labour, provide savings, contribute to the mar-
ket for industrial goods, and earn foreign exchange, it must generate a steadily rising surplus of 
production in excess of subsistence needs. Since land is relatively fixed in supply, this requires ris-
ing agricultural productivity. The ‘grassroots’ school of economic development, which came into 
fashion as a reaction against the emphasis on industrialization at any cost, lays stress on policies 
to raise the level of productivity in agriculture as the most crucial development priority and an 
indispensable element of a long-run development strategy. Overall, agricultural productivity in 
developing countries is less than one-twentieth of the level in developed countries, and there are 
even bigger differences between countries.
Table 5.1 gives figures on agricultural productivity in selected regions of the world in 2013 
measured in US dollars at 2005 prices. Notice the huge disparities that exist, which go some way 
to explaining divisions in world income. In low-income countries, in which over half of the popu-
lation are engaged in agriculture, value-added per head is only $310, which is less than a dollar a 
day. In sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (which includes India, Bangladesh and Pakistan), prod­
uctivity is less than $2 a day. In East Asia and the Pacific region (which includes China), value-
added is just over $2 day. By contrast, in the high-income countries, productivity is over $24,000. 
Some progress has been made in recent years with particular crops in particular countries, but 
Table 5.1  Agricultural productivity, 2013
Value-added per worker, US$
World
1,406
Low income
310
Middle income
1,053
Lower middle income
939
Upper middle income
1,156
Low and middle income
956
East Asia and Pacific
803
Europe and Central Asia
5,247
Latin America and Caribbean
4,125
Middle East and North Africa
3,264
South Asia
711
Sub-Saharan Africa
706
High income
24,509
Source: World Bank, 2015.
146
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
the performance of the agricultural sector is still disappointing, and the lack of marketable sur-
plus still holds back development on a wide front. So what impedes agricultural productivity? 
There are several factors, particularly related to geography and land–labour ratios, the existence 
of urban bias in the treatment of agriculture and the allocation of resources, and unfair competi-
tion in world markets, but the most important factors of all are the structure of rural societies, the 
organization of agriculture and the land tenure system that operates.
As far as geographical factors are concerned, climate and terrain determine, to a large degree, 
what goods a country can produce, the amount of cultivatable land available per inhabitant 
and the land’s fertility. To some extent, the application of capital to land can compensate for 
un­
favourable natural forces, but there are obvious limits. Mountains cannot easily be flattened or 
deserts readily watered. This is the concept of geographic determinism, which can be advanced 
as a hypothesis of underdevelopment in its own right. Having said this, however, differences in 
natural conditions and the fertility of the soil can be no more than a partial explanation of low 
productivity. Poor people are to be found along the highly productive alluvial banks of the Nile, as 
well as on the barren plateaus of Asia and South America.
Productivity is also affected by land–labour ratios. Low labour productivity may be associated, 
 
for example, with a high population density and a high ratio of labour to land. In this case, product­
ivity might be increased substantially with small applications of capital in the form of drainage 
schemes, fertilizers and so on. On the other hand, low productivity may be associated with the 
opposite situation of a high ratio of land to labour, in which case the solution to low productivity 
is likely to involve much larger doses of capital for labour to work with. Most countries in Asia 
have high ratios of labour to land, while in Latin America and Africa, the reverse is true, as was 
the case in many of today’s richest countries at an equivalent stage in their economic history, for 
example the USA, Canada and Australia.
Urban bias against agriculture takes many forms:
•
• The holding down of agricultural prices to favour the industrial/urban sector.
•
• The concentration of investment in industry.
•
• Tax incentives and subsidies to industry.
•
• Overvalued exchange rates, which keep the price of industrial inputs low, and the domestic 
price of agricultural exports low.
•
• Tariff and quota protection for industry, which raises the price of fertilizers, seeds and equipment.
•
• Greater spending in urban areas on education, training, housing, nutrition and medical provi-
sion, which all affect productivity and the quality of life.
Unfair competition consists of the subsidies that developed countries give to their farm-
ers, and the tariffs that developed countries impose on imported agricultural products from 
developing countries. The USA and the European Union (EU) alone spend nearly $150 billion a 
year on farm subsidies. This has two major consequences. First, it leads to overproduction, and 
the surpluses are then frequently dumped on the markets of developing countries, impoverish-
ing domestic farmers. Second, farmers in developing countries are not able to compete in their 
own markets, let alone overseas markets. The situation is made worse by developing countries 
being forced by international agreements to lower their tariffs against imported agricultural 
produce, while developed countries continue to protect their own agricultural sectors. The 
average global tariff on agricultural commodities is 62%. The maize growers of Mexico cannot 
compete with cheap maize from the USA; nor can the cotton growers of West Africa compete 
against subsidies of $4 billion a year given to the 20,000 cotton growers in the southern states of 
America. Unfair competition between developed and developing countries in the markets for 
147
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
agricultural goods is one of the central issues in ongoing world trade talks under the auspices 
of the World Trade Organization.
Geographic factors, the land–labour ratio, urban bias and competition from developed coun-
tries can only explain a small part of the low productivity of agriculture in most developing coun-
tries. There are more fundamental forces at work concerned with the structure of rural society, the 
organization of agriculture, the incentives to produce and the supply of inputs (see Binswanger 
and Deininger, 1997).
In a typical developing country, rural society consists of rich landowners, peasants, share-
croppers, tenants and labourers. Apart from the landowners, most others in the rural sector are 
extremely poor. Because they live on the margin of subsistence, they tend to be risk averse. In all 
developing countries, peasant subsistence farming is a traditional way of life, and attempts to raise 
productivity will alter that way of life and necessarily involve risk. As Theodore Schultz (1980) 
perceptively remarked in his Nobel Prize-winning lecture:
Most of the people in the world are poor, so if we knew the economics of being poor we would 
know much of the economics that really matters. Most of the world’s poor people earn their 
living from agriculture so if we knew the economics of agriculture we would know much of 
the economics of being poor. People who are rich find it hard to understand the behaviour of 
poor people. Economists are no exception, for they, too, find it difficult to comprehend the 
preferences and scarcity constraints that determine the choices that poor people make. We 
all know that most of the world’s people are poor, that they earn a pittance for their labour, 
that half and more of their meagre income is spent on food, that they reside predominantly in 
low-income countries and that most of them are earning their livelihood in agriculture. What 
many economists fail to understand is that poor people are no less concerned about improv-
ing their lot and that of their children than rich people are.
Poor people on the margin of subsistence may be reluctant to make the changes necessary to 
improve productivity because if things go wrong it will spell disaster. But even if poor people 
wanted to change the traditional ways of doing things, there is the serious constraint of lack of 
access to credit to finance the purchase of new inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, drain-
age schemes and so on.
Then there is the question of the incentive to change. Where there are tenant farmers, there 
is little or no security of tenure, and therefore no incentive to invest in improved methods of 
production. Where there is sharecropping, a certain proportion of output must be relinquished 
to the landowner, which also reduces the incentive to invest. Any serious programme of agrarian 
reform must provide greater security of tenure for farmers and give incentives to raise agricultural 
production, coupled with access to credit, water, fertilizers and extension services for advice.
The appendix to this chapter gives a detailed description of the markets for land, labour and 
credit in rural societies, how they are interlocked, and the inefficiencies that arise as a result of the 
structure of the agricultural sector of developing countries.
Land reform
The system by which land is held and farmed is a serious impediment to increased productivity in 
many developing countries. The structure of peasant agriculture differs between countries, largely 
for historical reasons, but the structures have many common characteristics that keep productiv-
ity low. In many countries, landholding tends to be highly concentrated. The average Gini ratio for 
148
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
the concentration of landholdings in Latin America is 0.8, and in Asia, 0.4. In Latin America, 1% 
of landowners own roughly 70% of the land. In Brazil, 15% of landowners own 90% of the land. In 
many parts of Latin America, agriculture is based on a combination of large estates (latifundios), 
owned by a wealthy few, and small farms (minifundios), which are often so small that they cannot 
support a single family. When land is held and worked in the form of large estates, it is frequently 
underutilized and farmed inefficiently by peasants, who may have no security of tenure and may 
have to relinquish to the landowner a large fraction of their output. In these circumstances, there 
is little incentive to increase efficiency and improve productivity.
In Asia, the organization of peasant agriculture is also an important determinant of productiv-
ity. Because of the high population density, the major problem is that too many small farms are 
operated by sharecroppers and tenant farmers, the land being owned by absentee landlords. As 
families multiply and debts rise, land is continually sold and subdivided, leading to a very inef-
ficient structure.
Land reform has two aspects: first, the redistribution of land in favour of landless or near-
landless households, and second, tenancy reform in favour of sharecroppers and other forms of 
tenant farming. Such reforms involving land rights, and security for tenants, can contribute both 
to an increased intensity of land use and to improved efficiency and initiative on the part of the 
tenant farmers, particularly if they are allowed to reap fully the rewards of their own labour.
There is impressive evidence that where a change in the tenure system has permitted the pro-
ducers themselves to reap the rewards of new techniques, peasant farmers have been ready to 
break with custom and tradition. The task of persuading producers to adopt more modern meth-
ods of production and to purchase improved seeds and fertilizers has been much easier. In a study 
of China from 1978, Lin (1992) finds that the shift from collective to household farming led to 
big increases in agricultural productivity related to the acquisition of property and land rights. 
Likewise, in a study of India, Besley and Burgess (2000) find that rural poverty was reduced by land 
reform, particularly reforms that strengthened property rights over land. In Vietnam, efficiency 
has increased and poverty has been reduced since the end of collectivization in the 1990s.
As was first discovered by Amartya Sen (1964), using Indian farm data, small farms are more 
productive (per hectare) than large farms. This has been shown in many other studies subse-
quently. The reason is that land tends to be more fertile on small farms, and family labour tends 
to work the land more intensively. In other words, small farms tend to employ more labour per 
unit of land than large farms. Thus, land redistribution from owners of large estates to smaller 
family farms can raise agricultural output and employment simultaneously, helping to reduce 
poverty.
Land reform may be a necessary condition for increased productivity, but it is clearly not 
a sufficient condition. It needs to be accompanied by other measures of agrarian reform. New 
landowners must be given access to credit, water, fertilizers and extension services for advice. 
Farmers need to be brought within the organized money market to improve access to credit and 
to reduce the role of village moneylenders, who charge exorbitant interest rates. Improved farm 
implements, irrigation and new social infrastructure are likely to be important. There needs to 
be improved dissemination of agricultural research. Too often, the agricultural extension services 
available are perfunctory and ineffective because the personnel are ill-trained and ill-equipped. 
Conditions vary from country to country, but in theory at least, agrarian reform, coupled with the 
application of complementary inputs, offers substantial scope for increased agricultural product­
ivity.1 See Case example 5.1 on the attempt to raise productivity in Africa, and Case example 5.2 
on the approach of the World Bank.
149
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
African agriculture was often neglected by most governments and donors in the 1980s 
and 1990s. Now, however, there is a renewed commitment to agriculture centred on 
the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Programme. There is broad 
agreement that there needs to be more investment in agriculture, particularly in public 
goods, such as rural roads, agricultural research and extension services, rural schooling, 
clean water and healthcare. But, often in rural Africa, there are market failures in that 
farmers cannot get access to credit, insurance and necessary inputs. These failures can 
be severe and leave small farmers in a poverty trap from which they struggle to escape 
even when the technology exists for them to produce more.
Subsidies can help overcome poor farmers’ inability to obtain credit or take risks 
and to allow farmers to learn about new agricultural inputs such as new seeds and 
fertilizers. Subsidies can also be justified, on the grounds of equity, to overcome soil 
degradation and improve soil quality in the case of fertilizers, and to stimulate produc-
tion to reduce the cost of food and raise the real incomes of the poor. But subsidies can 
be costly, with costs rising over time if not targeted properly. Where subsidies are used, 
they need to be ‘smart’: targeted to those who need them most, limited in time, and 
designed to enhance commercial distribution rather than supplant it. Complementary 
investment in transport and input dealer training can reinforce these programmes and 
make it easier to reduce or remove subsidies in the future. There are alternatives to 
subsidies, as Keyna’s experience of liberalized fertilizer distribution shows.
Source: Africa Progress Panel, 2010.
Case example 5.1
Raising agricultural productivity in Africa
The World Bank is committed to boosting agricultural productivity and agricultural-
related investment. The world needs to produce at least 50% more food by the year 
2050 to feed a projected 9 billion people. To help meet this goal, the bank is working 
with countries to boost the productivity of farms, livestock and fisheries.
To raise yields sustainably, the bank supports ‘climate-smart’ approaches that have 
the potential to increase productivity, enhance resilience, promote agricultural innov­
ation through research and education, and facilitate responsible agricultural invest-
ment. Gender-specific interventions are important because women account for the 
majority of smallholder farms – up to 70% in Africa.
Improved land governance can help smallholder farmers increase the productivity 
of their land and improve their livelihoods. The bank supports government policies 
that implement systematic land surveying and titling programmes that recognize all 
forms of land tenure.
The bank is committed to agricultural innovations that boost productivity, as well as 
better land and water management. It also promotes the use of new livestock breeds, bet-
ter animal nutrition, improved veterinary services, vaccinations and improved husbandry 
to sustainably increase livestock productivity for about 1 billion farmers who depend on 
livestock for their livelihoods. The bank supports work on breeding and animal nutrition 
in India, grassland management in China, and sustainable aquaculture at coastal fisheries 
in Tanzania and Vietnam. These are just a few examples of the World Bank’s work.
Source: World Bank, 2013.
Case example 5.2
The World Bank tackles low productivity in agriculture
150
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
The supply response of agriculture
What may also be required is a rise in the price of agricultural products relative to industrial 
products in order to induce extra supply. Traditionally, attempts have been made to ‘tax’ the 
agricultural sector by keeping prices low in order to maintain the terms of trade in favour of 
the industrial sector. This policy was justified by the widespread belief that peasant producers in 
traditional societies would not respond to price incentives, but this assumption has proved to be 
wrong. Depressing the agricultural terms of trade has depressed agricultural output and caused 
problems for the feeding of a growing urban population.
Many countries have had to introduce a positive price policy to act as a stimulus to agricultural 
output in general and to alter the composition of agricultural output as circumstances warrant. 
There is, in fact, considerable evidence that producers, especially those in close proximity to large 
markets with good transport facilities, respond positively to price changes, as economic theory 
would predict. Schultz (1964) gave early warning that ‘the doctrine that farmers in poor countries 
either are indifferent or respond perversely to changes in prices . . . is patently false and harmful. 
Price policies based on it always impair the efficiency of agriculture.’
When discussing the supply response of agricultural output to price, however, a distinction 
needs to be made between three types of response:
•
• A change in the composition of agricultural output to a change in the relative price of indi-
vidual agricultural commodities.
•
• An increase in total agricultural output with respect to an improvement in the relative price of 
agricultural commodities compared with industrial goods.
•
• An increase in the marketed surplus in response to an increase in the price of agricultural 
­
commodities.
Most of the studies on the supply response in peasant agriculture in developing countries relate 
to how producers respond to changes in the relative price of different agricultural commodities. 
But, of course, it would be quite possible for the supply of any individual commodity to be quite 
elastic with respect to price, yet the total supply of agricultural output and the marketed surplus 
to be quite inelastic, or even to fall, in response to a change in prices.
Having said this, there are reasons for believing that the other two elasticities are likely to be 
positive if the supply of individual commodities is positive, especially when crops are grown not 
just for subsistence purposes. For example, for any crop grown commercially, the elasticity of 
marketed supply will be virtually equal to the output elasticity, and unless inputs are withdrawn 
from the production of other commodities, the elasticity of total agricultural supply will also be 
positive. Only in cases where peasants are content with a fixed money income, or all increased 
production of a commodity is consumed within the subsistence sector, will the elasticity of mar-
keted supply be zero or negative at the same time as the price elasticity of supply is positive. These 
conditions are not likely to prevail.
Empirical research on the supply response of agriculture can be divided into four main 
categories:
1.	 Cross-country studies that look at output differences in relation to price differences across 
countries.
2.	 Time-series studies that examine output movements in relation to price movements within 
countries over time.
3.	 Cross-section studies that look at output differences in relation to price differences across 
farms within a country.
151
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
4.	 Intersectoral general equilibrium models that examine how the output of agriculture varies in 
response to changes in the prices of agricultural goods relative to the price of other goods in 
the economy.
The evidence shows that aggregate supply elasticities of agricultural output range from 0.3 to 0.9 
(Chhibber, 1988).2 Long-run elasticity is obviously higher than short-run elasticity, and elasticity 
tends to be higher in the more advanced and land-abundant developing countries. The supply 
response of farmers to price changes depends crucially on the ability of farmers to respond to price 
signals, which, in turn, depends on transport, infrastructure and access to agricultural inputs. In 
poorer countries with inadequate infrastructure, supply elasticity is low (0.2–0.5). In fact, the sup-
ply elasticity of agriculture with respect to non-price factors (e.g., the provision of public goods and 
services) is much higher than it is with respect to price, especially in poorer developing countries 
with inadequate infrastructure and marketing facilities. In a study of farm households in Ethiopia, 
Abrar et al. (2004) find a high supply response of different crops to changes in relative prices, but 
non-price factors such as access to fertilizers, land, infrastructure and marketing are often more 
important than prices in determining how much of which crops is produced for market.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank are naturally concerned with the 
performance of the agricultural sector in countries to which they lend under various adjustment 
programmes (see Chapters 14 and 16). Three interrelated issues are typically addressed:
•
• The terms of trade between agriculture and the rest of the economy.
•
• The efficiency of the agricultural sector.
•
• The supply response of agriculture to price changes.
With regard to the agricultural terms of trade, the IMF normally insists that the prices paid by 
state marketing boards to producers be increased. Traditionally, governments have ‘taxed’ the 
agricultural sector through agricultural marketing boards, driving a large wedge between the 
prices paid to producers and the market prices of the commodities concerned. One implication, 
therefore, of raising producer prices is that government revenue may fall. This has implications 
for government expenditure if there is a budget constraint. Only if the elasticity of the supply of 
output with respect to producer prices is greater than unity will government revenue not fall; but 
as we saw above, supply elasticity is typically less than unity.
To achieve efficiency within agriculture, the IMF concentrates on factors such as improving 
storage and transport facilities, increasing the availability of agricultural inputs, improving exten-
sion services, insisting on the economic pricing of output and inputs, and privatizing marketing 
and extension services.
We saw earlier that the supply response of farmers to price changes depends a great deal on 
the ability to respond, which, in turn, depends on infrastructure, transport, access to inputs and 
so on. Governments may be in a dilemma here because raising producer prices and reducing their 
own revenue may impair their ability to spend on infrastructure and other facilities. Given that 
the elasticity of supply with respect to non-price factors is higher than with respect to price, it 
would seem unwise to cut public expenditure as far as it affects the agricultural sector.
Transforming traditional agriculture
The task of transforming traditional agriculture is not simply a question of land reform or price 
policy, however. The transformation of traditional agriculture is also dependent on new inputs. 
The policy issue is to determine the form that the new inputs should take if agriculture is to 
152
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E   
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
attract an adequate share of investment resources. New seeds are especially important to raise 
agricultural productivity (see Lipton and Longhurst, 1989).
The way to transform traditional agriculture into a dynamic source of growth is by investment 
to produce a supply of new agricultural inputs that will be proﬁtable for farmers to adopt. What is 
lacking is not so much an unwillingness on the part of the agricultural sector to accept new ideas, 
but public expenditure and the organization of particular public activities to serve the agricultural 
sector. Agricultural research, and investment in people to improve human capabilities in agricul-
ture, has been neglected.
The state of agriculture in Africa is particularly dire. Agricultural yields are low and food short-
ages and undernourishment are rife. Much of the support in place for agriculture in Africa was 
dismantled in the 1970s by World Bank structural adjustment programmes (see Chapter 14); for 
example, subsidies for fertilizers and seeds, guaranteed prices for crops, and research and devel-
opment – all the policies that supported Asia’s so-called Green Revolution in the 1960s, which 
tripled and quadrupled yields of crops such as wheat, rice and maize.
ʾFGBUIFSPGUIFT(SFFO3FWPMVUJPO	XIJDICZQBTTFE"GSJDB
XBTNorman Borlaug, an 
American biologist working in Mexico, who crossed Japanese dwarf wheat with a disease-resistant 
local strain to produce a high-yielding hybrid, which came to be known as ‘Mexican dwarf wheat’. 
In countries such as India and Pakistan, yields increased threefold. Borlaug is credited with saving 
more lives than anyone in history – at least 1 billion in Asia alone. His motto was ‘it is impossible 
to build a peaceful world on empty stomachs’. He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970 and 
died in 2009, aged 95. Borlaug’s breakthrough – the result of 30 years’ research – is a prime example 
of the impact that technology can have on the productivity of agriculture.
"TJNJMBSCSFBLUISPVHIPSALJDLTUBSUJTSFRVJSFEJO"GSJDB5PUIJTFOEBO"MMJBODFGPSB(SFFO
3FWPMVUJPOJO"GSJDB	"(3"
XBTGPVOEFEJOXJUIBNJMMJPOHSBOUGSPNUIF3PDLFGFMMFS
'PVOEBUJPO BOE UIF #JMM  .FMJOEB (BUFT 'PVOEBUJPO UP IFMQ SBJTF ZJFMET UISPVHI JNQSPWFE
farming methods, new seeds and fertilizers, working with the African Agricultural Technology 
Foundation based in Nairobi, Kenya. One of the major projects is to develop ‘water-eﬃcient’ 
maize to cope with long periods of drought now being experienced in southern Africa.
*OHFOFSBMUIFSFJTBOFFEGPSBTFDPOE(SFFO3FWPMVUJPOJOBHSJDVMUVSFUPGPMMPXUIFmSTUJO
the 1960s, which has now run its course. Modern science can help. Biotechnology, including 
genetically modiﬁed (GM) technology, has the potential to raise productivity substantially and 
UPSFEVDFUIFJODJEFODFPGGBNJOFBOENBMOVUSJUJPO"(.DSPQJTBOZDSPQWBSJFUZUIBUIBTIBE
a gene or genes from a diﬀerent species or variety inserted into its genetic material using genetic 
engineering techniques. Currently, about 15% of the world’s farmland (approximately 180 million 
IFDUBSFT
JTEFWPUFEUP(.DSPQT3FTFBSDIJTCFJOHEPOFPONBOZDSPQTCVUWJSUVBMMZBMMQMBOUJOH
covers just ﬁve crops: soya beans, maize, cotton, rice and oilseed rape (canola). There is, however, 
TUSPOHPQQPTJUJPOUP(.DSPQTGSPNDPOTVNFSTBOEFOWJSPONFOUBMHSPVQTPOUIFHSPVOETPG
SJTLUPIVNBOIFBMUICVU(.DSPQTBSFBMSFBEZJOUIFGPPEDIBJOCFDBVTFUIFZBSFXJEFMZVTFE
as processed food ingredients and for animal feed. So far, there is no scientiﬁc evidence that they 
are harmful.
ʾFCFOFmUPG(.UFDIOPMPHZJTUIBUJUDBOQSPEVDFDSPQTUIBUDBOSFTJTUQFTUTDBOHSPXJO
salty soil, are drought resistant, use nitrogen more eﬃciently, can be stored for longer, and are 
more nutritious. Rice is an important staple food for poor people. Over 3 billion people in the 
world get at least 20% of their calorie intake from rice. The International Rice Research Institute 
in Manila, Philippines is at the forefront of research to produce diﬀerent varieties of rice to suit 
particular environments where the problem may be drought, ﬂooding, heat or salty water. With 
152
153
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
regard to nutrition, Ingo Potrykus, working in Zurich, teamed up with Peter Beyer to genetic­
ally engineer a type of rice (‘golden rice’) to contain beta-carotene, which is the pigment that 
produces vitamin A. This is an important breakthrough since vitamin A deficiency kills 2 million 
children a year and blinds many more. This research has been funded not by biotechnology com-
panies, concerned with maximizing returns by patenting and the exercise of intellectual property 
rights, but by the Swiss government and the Rockefeller Foundation. The plan is for growers to be 
given the new rice free by national research centres supervised by the International Rice Research 
Institute. Agricultural innovation cannot flourish without well-resourced agricultural extension 
services within countries. Research is now under way to cross ‘golden rice’ with a grain implanted 
with three genes to boost iron content to combat anaemia, which many people suffer from in 
developing countries. A quality protein maize has also been developed by Norman Borlaug, con-
taining many important amino acids that could dramatically reduce the number of children who 
die of malnutrition. GM cotton has increased yields by nearly 100% in India by being more disease 
resistant.
Some people argue that GM is the only technology that can prevent future world food crises 
and rising prices of basic foodstuffs. Malnutrition remains a major scourge in developing coun-
tries, and by 2030, there will also be 2 billion more mouths to feed. The application of new tech-
nology is urgently required.
What matters most are the incentives and associated opportunities that farm people have 
to augment production by means of investments that include the contribution of agricul-
tural research and the improvement of human skills. We emphasize again that subsistence 
agriculture is an uncertain activity and therefore risky, particularly when survival is at stake, 
and this is another factor that breeds conservatism and makes change difficult, even in the 
face of opportunities. Poor people prefer to be safe than sorry; they tend to prefer an inferior 
outcome that is relatively certain to the prospect of a higher average return with a greater 
degree of risk attached. They are risk averse. This is clearly not irrational behaviour for poor 
people living on the margin of subsistence, even if the greater risk is imagined rather than real. 
To overcome inertia on this score, an integral element of agrarian reform must be policies 
designed to minimize risk and uncertainty through the provision of various types of insurance 
(as discussed in Chapter 2).
The growth of the money economy
The question of the willingness to change customs and traditions leads naturally to a consid-
eration of how peasant subsistence economies, producing goods for consumption only, typically 
transform themselves into money economies with an export and industrial sector. From historical 
experience (see Chang, 2009), two factors would appear to be crucial for the expansion of the 
agricultural sector and the eventual production of goods for exchange at home and abroad:
1.	 The expansion of communications to create outlets and markets for surplus production – and 
to encourage the production of the surplus itself.
2.	 The emergence of a class of middlemen or export–import merchants acting as agents between 
world markets and the domestic agricultural sectors.
If these conditions prevail, purely subsistence farming can develop first into mixed agriculture, 
where part of the crop is retained for subsistence and part is sold in the market, and then into 
modern agriculture with production entirely for the market, very often based on one crop. In 
154
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
the transition from subsistence agriculture, cash crops can utilize slack labour and land when the 
­
subsistence crops are finished; but the transition into mixed farming is possible only if the farmer 
has the inputs to raise productivity and the credit to purchase those inputs, as well as the market-
ing facilities.
Modern agriculture, run on strictly commercial lines for profit and based on one crop, must 
rely on exports since the size of the domestic market will generally be too small. The system of 
modern commercialized agriculture, upon which many developing countries depend for their 
export earnings, is often termed agribusiness. This is a catch-all phrase referring not only to 
the production of the commodity in question, but also to the backward and forward linkages 
associated with the production process: the provision of finance, machinery, fertilizers, seed and 
so on at the input end, and the processing, manufacturing and marketing of the product at the 
output end.
Today, multinational corporations have a powerful position and a strong hold over the pro-
duction and export of major agricultural commodities produced in developing countries. To give 
just a few examples: three US firms control over one-half of the global banana trade, five European 
companies control 90% of the tea sold in developed countries, and the two largest coffee com­
panies control 20% of the world market.
The ability to export and the ability to market internally imply surplus production over sub-
sistence needs, and it is the size of this surplus that will largely determine the speed with which 
the subsistence sector can be drawn into the money economy. Again, we come to the fact that 
unless productivity in agriculture increases, the expansion of the monetized sector will tend to 
decelerate as the land for cultivation dries up. When land has been exploited to the full, it acts as 
a constraint on development unless agricultural productivity increases or non-agricultural activ­
ities can be established.
The emergence of an export sector provides a powerful stimulus to the development and 
extension of the money economy. Exports create the capacity to import, and the very purchase of 
foreign products can encourage further export specialization. A population that acquires a taste 
for imported goods provides the impetus to producers to export more. In the case of new goods, 
as well as new techniques, there is strong evidence that peasant producers respond to incentives, 
and are not as different from ‘Western economic man’ as is sometimes claimed. Imports also 
provide a stimulus to industrialization. If a market for a foreign manufactured good becomes 
established, it becomes easier and less risky, with the aid of tariff protection, for a domestic 
manu­
facturer to set up in business because the market is assured. Imports can also substitute for 
domestic capital and raise the growth rate directly.
When farmers start to specialize in goods for export, and rely on other producers for goods 
they previously produced themselves, the money economy will spread from the foreign trade 
sector to the rest of the domestic economy. This is nothing more than the international division 
of labour giving rise to the need for a means of exchange within a country as well as between 
countries.
The emergence of an export sector, the spread of the money economy and the establishment 
of industries typically occur concurrently. What form industrialization takes will depend, in the 
first instance, on the initial impetus. One stimulus to industrialization that we have already 
mentioned is imports creating a market for goods that can be produced domestically without 
much difficulty. A more obvious factor leading naturally to industrialization is the availability 
of resources from the land, forming an indigenous industrial base. In this case, industrialization 
takes the form of the processing of raw materials. There are few countries that do not possess 
155
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
some natural resource or other, and every country will have a comparative advantage in the 
production of one or other raw material that can be processed. These are the agribusinesses 
mentioned earlier.
In many of the present developing countries, formerly under colonial rule, the initiating 
force behind industrialization was the foreign exploitation of resources. Industrial activity took 
the form of mining operations and plantation agriculture. The establishment of foreign enclave 
activities undoubtedly exerted a development impact, but it is sometimes argued that devel-
opment would have been more rapid if countries had been left to their own devices. Some 
claim that the long-run development of these countries was impaired because the availabil-
ity of cheap labour from the subsistence sector discouraged the installation of more mod-
ern productive machinery, and also that the foreign ownership and exploitation of countries’ 
resources considerably reduced the potential level of investment through the remittance of 
profits to the host country. This is the argument of dependency theorists, which is discussed 
more fully in Chapter 10.
Finance for traditional agriculture
For many years, traditional agriculture has been starved of investment resources. While it 
accounts for approximately 30% of output and 50% of total employment, it attracts little more 
than 10% of total investment resources. Private capital has no doubt been deterred by the risks 
involved and the low returns in traditional agriculture. But institutional investment has also 
been meagre. For example, in the early years of the World Bank, 1947–59, only $124 million was 
spent on agriculture out of total loans of $4 billion. Official development assistance (ODA) to 
agriculture from multilateral and bilateral sources rose sharply in the 1970s, but since 1979, the 
share of ODA going to agriculture decreased from 18% to 3.5% in 2004. In absolute terms, it 
reached a peak of $8 billion (measured at 2004 US$) in 1984, falling to only £3.4 billion in 2004 
(World Bank, 2007).
Within agriculture-based developing economies, the share of public expenditure spent on 
agriculture has also decreased from 7% in 1980 to 4% in 2004 (World Bank, 2007). This gives some 
measure of the neglect of agriculture, which was partly responsible for the world food crisis and 
food price rises in 2007–08.
The public sectors of developing countries, and multilateral institutions such as the World 
Bank, have a responsibility to invest in agriculture to raise productivity and combat poverty. Some 
projects will involve increasing the output of traditional crops through the more effective use of 
seeds, fertilizers and water. Other projects will involve changing the product mix from subsistence 
crops to the production of high-value crops.
At present, the largest single component of lending to agriculture is irrigation, which permits 
the expansion of cultivation and makes more intensive cultivation possible by permitting dou-
ble cropping. Bank-financed irrigation schemes have had a major impact on rice yields and pro-
duction in Asia. The World Bank has also become the most important source of financial and 
technical assistance for the construction of fertilizer plants in developing countries, and these 
have played an important role in increasing yields and output. The World Bank gives credit for 
rural infrastructure projects, such as roads to reduce marketing and supply bottlenecks, and rural 
electrification schemes. Agricultural extension is another important aspect of the World Bank’s 
assistance to the rural sector. In India, where ‘contact’ farmers disseminate knowledge to their 
neighbours of improved techniques learnt from field agents, over 10 million farm families have 
156
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
been helped. The rural poor now have more extensive and easier access to credit financed by the 
World Bank. In India, much of the credit has been used by small farmers to provide supplemen-
tary irrigation.
Finally, the World Bank operates various multipurpose projects that combine a wide range 
of activities, normally in conjunction with a regional development programme. In Mexico, some 
75,000 low-income families have benefited from such a project in about 30 localities through 
investments in irrigation, soil conservation, electrification, schools, healthcare, water supplies and 
marketing services. Each dollar the bank invests in rural development is supplemented by local 
investment, and the bank rightly stresses that its contribution to the total flow of resources can 
be effective only if appropriate national policies are pursued on pricing, taxation, land reform and 
so on. The major part of the World Bank’s programme to reach the rural poor is still in the process 
of implementation, and is therefore difficult to assess reliably, but indications suggest that a com-
bination of additional resources, institutional reforms and national government commitment to 
improvement in the rural sector can have a major impact.
Apart from the World Bank, other multilateral institutions exist to help traditional agriculture, 
notably the UN’s International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), which seeks to inte-
grate small farmers and landless people into the development process. IFAD states that its priority 
is for ‘projects which will have a significant impact on improving food production in developing 
countries, particularly for the benefit of the poorest sections of the rural population’. Between 
1978 and 2014, $15 billion had been dispersed.
In the absence of external institutional investment, the sources of capital for the expansion 
of agriculture and industry are relatively limited in the early stages of development. In a truly 
subsistence economy, in the sense of an economy producing only what it needs for itself and 
no more, everyone is a Robinson Crusoe, supplying their own capital by refraining from present 
consumption. With specialization in the production of goods for export, and the producer’s need 
for capital to expand productive capacity, mechanisms grow up spontaneously to meet the need 
for credit. It is a good market maxim that demand will create a supplier at a price. The suppliers 
are generally village moneylenders, shopkeepers, landlords and, not infrequently, the Church – 
­
especially in South America – charging rates of interest that often exceed 50%.
The interdependence of agriculture and industry
Once agriculture emerges from its subsistence state and starts to specialize and produce goods 
for export, and industry develops under the impact of growth in the agricultural sector, the two 
sectors of agriculture and industry become interdependent. The industrial sector adds to the 
demand for goods produced by agriculture and absorbs surplus labour, which may raise product­
ivity in agriculture. In turn, the agricultural sector provides a market for industrial goods out of ris-
ing real income, and makes a factor contribution to development through the release of resources 
if productivity rises faster than the demand for commodities. Adam Smith, in Wealth of Nations 
(1776), clearly recognized this interdependence (Kim, 2015).
Demand coming from agriculture can be a major stimulus to industrialization. Adelman (1984) 
has described the process as ‘agricultural demand-led industrialization’. Taking 27 social account-
ing matrixes for low- and high-income economies, Vogel (1994) has shown that the impact of 
agriculture on industry is much higher than the impact of industry on agriculture, and it increases 
with the level of income. At low levels of income, a $1 expenditure in agriculture generates a 
$2.75 increase in induced demand for non-agricultural inputs and services, and a $10 increase 
157
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
in high-income countries. It is rural household demand that contributes most to the backward 
multiplier, which leads Vogel (1994) to conclude: ‘the early development theorists failed to articu-
late a place for rural household demand for consumer goods. Not recognizing the centrality of 
these institutional feedbacks in agriculture’s production linkages in developing economies has 
been one of the great failures of theories of economic development.’ It is true that a stagnant rural 
sector has held back industrial development in several developing countries. (See section below, 
A model of the complementarity between agriculture and industry.)
The transfer of resources from agriculture to industry may be in the form of capital or labour 
or both. Since labour is in abundant supply in most low-income countries, there is generally no 
difficulty in releasing labour for industry, except during harvest time. In any case, labour will tend 
to migrate naturally in response to seemingly better opportunities in the industrial sector and 
higher real incomes. The real earnings of labour in the industrial sector may be more than twice 
as much as the agricultural wage. If the industrial sector is to be guaranteed an adequate supply 
of labour, some wage differential is inevitably required to offset the higher real living costs in an 
urban environment, to compensate for the forfeit of non-monetary benefits of rural life, and to 
compensate for greater job uncertainty in the industrial sector. Real earnings may also be higher 
because of genuinely higher productivity in the industrial sector, where labour has more factors 
of production to work with. Most models of rural–urban migration make migration a positive 
function of the expected urban–rural wage differential, which is the difference between the urban 
wage, adjusted for the proportion of the total urban labour force employed (as a proxy for the 
probability of finding work), and the agricultural real wage (see the section below, Rural–urban 
migration and urban unemployment, for an outline of the model).
Capital may be less ‘mobile’ than labour, and if there is considered to be insufficient lending 
from the agricultural sector on a voluntary basis, it may become necessary for a government 
to extract savings compulsorily from the agricultural sector by taxation. As mentioned already, 
this method was resorted to in a harsh manner by Japan at the time of the Meiji Restoration 
and Soviet Russia after the communist revolution. In Japan between 1880 and 1900, the land 
tax provided approximately 80% of central government tax revenue, and in Russia forced extrac-
tion of the agricultural surplus took the form of expropriation of land and the extermination 
of labour. Industrialization in Western Europe, and particularly in England, was also financed to 
a large extent by surpluses generated on the land, but transference of these surpluses was, on 
the whole, voluntary through a rapidly expanding banking system. Today, developing countries, 
despite their access to foreign sources of capital, must also rely heavily on extracting the sur-
plus from agriculture to finance industrialization. The difficulty is to decide on the best means of 
extraction without impairing the incentive to produce, or damaging the growth of productivity, 
on which a growing agricultural surplus depends. The financing of economic development will be 
discussed more fully in Part IV.
Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour
The process of the emergence of a money economy from a subsistence state was formalized by 
Sir Arthur Lewis in his classic paper ‘Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour’ 
(1954).3 There, he presented a ‘classical’ model of a dual economy with the purpose, as he 
described it, of seeing what can be made of the classical framework for understanding the issues 
of distribution, capital accumulation and growth in developing countries. His ultimate aim was to 
emphasize the crucial role of the capitalist surplus in the development process.
158
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
The Lewis model therefore starts with the assumption of a dual economy with a modern 
exchange (capitalist) sector and an indigenous (non-capitalist) subsistence sector, and assumes 
that there are unlimited supplies of labour in the subsistence sector, in the sense that the supply 
of labour exceeds the demand for labour at the subsistence wage; that is, the marginal product 
of workers in the subsistence sector is equal to, or less than, the subsistence or institutional wage.
It has even been argued that the marginal product of labour may be zero or negative in an 
economy that is still at a fairly low level of development and experiencing a rapid growth of popu-
lation. Indeed, Lewis (1954) said: ‘there are large sectors of [a developing] economy where the 
marginal productivity of labour is negligible, zero or even negative’.
One of the distinguishing features of agriculture is that it is an activity that is subject to dimin-
ishing returns owing to the fixity of the supply of land. If there is rapid population growth and 
labour has little employment opportunity other than on the land, a stage may be reached where 
the land cannot provide further workers with a living unless the existing workers drastically reduce 
their hours of work. These propositions are illustrated in Figure 5.1. The curve drawn represents 
the marginal product of successive units of labour added to the land. After the employment of X 
units of labour, the marginal product of labour begins to fall owing to diminishing returns; after 
X1 units of labour, labour’s marginal contribution to output falls below the subsistence wage; and 
Arthur Lewis
Born 1915, St Lucia, West Indies. Died 1991. Professor of Economics, 
Manchester University, University of the West Indies and Princeton 
University. Vice-Chancellor, University of the West Indies; Director of the 
Caribbean Development Bank. Wrote the first textbook on development 
economics, The Theory of Economic Growth (1955), but most famous 
for his 1954 paper, ‘Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of 
Labour’, one of the most influential papers in development economics, 
still widely consulted today. One of the ‘fathers’ of development econom-
ics; awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics, 1979.
W
0
X
X1X2
Subsistence wage
Units of labour
added to land
Marginal product of labour
Figure 5.1  Marginal product of successive units of labour added to the land
159
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
after X2 units of labour, labour’s contribution to output becomes negative and total product will 
decline with successive additions of labour beyond X2.
In Lewis’s model, labour in excess of X1 in Figure 5.1 is in completely elastic supply to the 
industrial sector at whatever the industrial wage.4 The industrial or capitalist sector is repre-
sented in Figure 5.2. The curve NR represents the marginal product of labour in the capitalist 
sector, W is the industrial wage and, on the profit-maximizing assumption, labour is employed 
in the capitalist sector up to the point where the marginal product is equal to the wage rate. 
That is, M will be employed. Workers in excess of M earn what they can in the subsistence sec-
tor. The industrial wage is assumed to be determined in some relation to the wage that workers 
can earn in the subsistence sector. The differential (WW1) between the industrial wage and the 
subsistence wage will be a function of many factors, some of which were mentioned earlier, 
for example higher real living costs in the capitalist sector and greater job uncertainty. Given 
that the industrial wage is based on earnings in the subsistence sector, capitalists have a direct 
interest in holding down productivity in the subsistence sector, and Lewis commented that 
the record of every imperial power in Africa in modern times was one of impoverishing the 
subsistence economy.
In Figure 5.2, the total product of labour, 0NPM, is split between the payment to labour in 
the form of wages, 0WPM, and the capitalist surplus, WNP. The expansion of the capitalist sector 
and the rate of absorption of labour from the subsistence sector depends on the use made of the 
capitalist surplus. If the surplus is reinvested, leading to greater capital formation, this will increase 
the total product of labour. The marginal product curve will shift upwards to the right, say N1R1, 
which means that if wages remain constant, the capitalist sector can now afford to employ more 
labour and will do so by drawing on labour from the subsistence sector to the extent of MM1 
workers. The size of the capitalist surplus will increase from WNP to WN1P1, which is available for 
further reinvestment and so the process goes on. For Lewis, this is the essence of the development 
process. The stimulus to investment in the capitalist sector comes from the rate of profit, which 
must rise over time because all the benefits of increased productivity accrue to capital if the real 
wage is constant.5
According to Lewis (1954), the share of profits in the national income (P/0) will also rise. First, 
the share of profits in the capitalist sector (P/C) will increase, and second, the capitalist sector 
relative to the national income (C/0) will tend to expand; that is, if P/0 5 P/C 3 C/0, then P/0 will 
rise as P/C and C/0 increase. For Lewis, the latter is the more important. Lewis (1954) said: ‘if we 
ask why the less developed countries save so little, the answer is not because they are so poor but 
because their capitalist sector is so small’.
N
M
R
P1
P
W1
N1
W
M1
R1
0
Industrial wage
Subsistence
wage
Units of labour
Marginal product
Figure 5.2  Industrial/capitalist sector
160
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
The process outlined by Lewis comes to an end when capital accumulation has caught up 
with population, so that there is no surplus labour in the subsistence sector left to absorb. When 
all surplus labour is absorbed, the supply of labour to the industrial sector becomes less than 
perfectly elastic. It is now in the interests of producers in the subsistence sector to compete for 
labour, since the marginal product of labour is no longer below the institutional wage. This is the 
so-called ‘Lewis turning point’. This change in producer behaviour in the subsistence sector has 
also been defined as the end of the take-off stage (Ranis and Fei, 1961). There is a debate in the 
literature over whether China has reached the Lewis turning point (Islam and Yokota, 2008). Some 
argue that its arrival can be seen in more assertive workers and wage rises. Others argue, however, 
that recent wage rises represent an upward shift in the whole labour supply curve, not a turning 
point, because the reserves of labour in agriculture are still vast and where labour’s productivity 
is less than 20% of the rest of the economy. Lewis gave several reasons why wages may rise before 
the turning point is reached (see below).
Implicit in the Lewis model is the assumption that employment growth in the capitalist sec-
tor will be proportional to the rate of capital formation. If profits are reinvested in labour-saving 
technology, however, this will not be so, and the rate of growth of employment in the industrial 
sector, as well as the rate of absorption from the agricultural sector, may be very low.
It is also possible that the process of absorption may end prematurely before surplus labour 
in the subsistence sector is fully exhausted, owing to checks to the expansion of the capitalist 
surplus. Capital accumulation and labour absorption may be checked due to the expansion of the 
capitalist sector itself. For example, as the capitalist sector expands, the terms of trade may turn 
against it. If the demand for food expands faster than agricultural output, the capitalist sector will 
be forced to pay higher prices for food in exchange for industrial goods, reducing the size of the 
capitalist surplus. This will have two effects.
First, if the capitalists are forced to pay higher prices for the goods they buy relative to those 
they sell, this means less saving for investment. The problem does not arise if productivity in 
agriculture is expanding rapidly, but Lewis recognized that the failure of peasant agriculture to 
increase its productivity has probably been the chief factor holding back the expansion of the 
industrial sector in many developing countries. If this is so, argue Lewis’s critics, the growth of 
non-farm employment can be said to depend on the growth of the agricultural surplus. This is, in 
fact, the starting point of neoclassical models of development (see Jorgenson, 1966), in contrast 
to classical models with their emphasis on surplus labour.
The second effect arising from the expansion of the capitalist sector if there is a shortage of 
food is that the real wage may have to rise in industry, further squeezing the capitalist surplus. If 
labour is needed in agriculture to meet the demand for food, unlimited supplies of labour at a 
constant real wage may be very limited indeed. The assumption of an unlimited supply of labour 
is the central proposition underlying the classical approach to the theory of development, and 
Jorgenson has argued that the classical approach stands or falls by this hypothesis. Historically, 
of course, real wages have risen in agriculture and industry, and the capitalist sector has also 
expanded rapidly, which lends support to a middle view between the classical and neoclassical 
approaches. Lewis (1954) recognized the importance of both capital accumulation and food sup-
ply, and it is this consideration that forms the basis of his argument for the balanced growth of the 
agricultural and industrial sectors.
Capital accumulation in the industrial sector may also be checked for reasons unrelated to the 
expansion of the capitalist sector and its demand for food. For example, real wages may be forced 
up directly by trade unions, or indirectly through rising real wages in the subsistence sector due to 
increased agricultural productivity. Lewis (1954) states that:
161
  t  5 ) &  3 0 - &  0 '  " ( 3 * $ 6 -5 6 3 &  " / %  4 6 3 1 - 6 4  - " # 0 6 3
anything which raises the productivity of the subsistence sector (average product per person) 
will raise real wages in the capitalist sector, and will therefore reduce the capitalist surplus and 
the rate of capital accumulation, unless it at the same time more than correspondingly moves 
the terms of trade against the subsistence sector.
Lewis reached this conclusion because one of the simplifying assumptions of his classical two-
sector model is that the expansion of the capitalist sector is limited only by a shortage of capital, 
so that any increase in prices and purchasing power for farmers is not a stimulus to industrializa-
tion but an obstacle to the expansion of the capitalist sector. How does this square with the idea 
of the agricultural sector providing a market for industrial goods, and the view of the World Bank 
(1979) that ‘a stagnant rural economy with low purchasing power holds back industrial growth in 
many developing countries’? The answer is that there does seem to be a contradiction, because 
the classical approach emphasizes supply to the exclusion of demand, or rather takes for granted 
that there will always be a market clearing price for industrial goods. In practice, there will always 
be a minimum below which the price of industrial goods cannot fall, set by the subsistence level 
wage in industry.
Johnston and Mellor (1961) recognized this worrying feature of the Lewis model many years 
ago, when they perceptively remarked: ‘there is clearly a conﬂict between emphasis on agricul-
ture’s essential contribution to the capital requirements for overall development, and emphasis 
on increased farm purchasing power as a stimulus to industrialization. Nor is there any easy rec-
onciliation of the conﬂict.’ The challenge of reconciliation has never been taken up in a satisfactory
way, but there is a resolution of the conﬂict if the complementarity between the two sectors 
is recognized from the outset, and it is remembered that there must be an equilibrium terms of 
trade that balances supply and demand in both sectors. The basis of a model of reconciliation is 
provided by Kaldor (1979).
A model of the complementarity between agriculture and industry6
We have seen that agriculture provides the potential for capital accumulation in industry by pro-
viding a marketable surplus. The greater the surplus, the cheaper industry can obtain food and 
the more saving and capital accumulation can be undertaken. This is the supply side. But industry 
also needs a market for its industrial goods, which, in the early stages of development, must largely 
come from agriculture. This is the demand side, and the higher the price of agricultural goods, the 
HSFBUFSBHSJDVMUVSBMQVSDIBTJOHQPXFSXJMMCF(JWFOUIJTDPOnJDUCFUXFFOMPXGPPEQSJDFTCFJOH
good for industrial supply and high food prices being good for industrial demand, what is required 
is a simple model that brings together agriculture and industry in an equilibrium framework, 
where the terms of trade between agriculture and industry provide the equilibrating mechanism, 
ensuring that supply and demand grow at the same rate in each sector.
Let us ﬁrst model growth in the agricultural sector in relation to the terms of trade, then 
growth in the industrial sector, and then bring the two sectors together. Agriculture’s growth rate 
will be a function of how much it invests relative to output and of the productivity of investment. 
How much investment goods it obtains from industry in exchange for food that it ‘saves’ depends 
on the price of industrial goods relative to food; that is, on the terms of trade between industry 
and agriculture. The higher the price of investment goods, the lower the possible investment for a 
given amount of food and the lower the growth of supply capacity. This inverse relation between 
the industrial terms of trade (the price of industrial goods relative to the price of food) and the 
agricultural growth rate (gA) is shown in Figure 5.3.
161
162
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Industry’s growth rate will also be a function of its investment ratio and the productivity of 
investment. But there is a certain minimum to the terms of trade, below which industry would 
not be able to invest anything because all output would be required to pay for workers’ wage 
goods (food). If all wages are consumed, the cost of food input per unit of output in industry will 
depend on the real wage rate in industry divided by the productivity of labour, that is w/(O/L) 5 
(W/O), where w is the real wage and W is the wage bill. Industrial prices must cover W/O, and this 
sets the lower limit to industrial prices relative to food prices. At the other extreme, industrial 
growth cannot exceed a certain maximum where the price of food is so low relative to indus-
trial goods that all industrial goods are retained for investment in industry. The investment ratio 
approaches, in effect, 100%, and the upper limit to growth is given by the productivity of invest-
ment. The positive relation between the industrial terms of trade and the industrial growth rate 
(gI) is shown in Figure 5.4.
If we now assume for simplicity (although without loss of generality) that the income elasticity 
of demand for agricultural and industrial goods is unity, then at a given terms of trade, the rate of 
growth of agricultural output represents the rate of growth of demand for industrial goods, and 
the rate of growth of industrial output represents the rate of growth of demand for agricultural 
output, and where gA and gI cross, there will be balanced growth of agriculture and industry (g*) 
at equilibrium terms of trade (p*), as shown in Figure 5.5.7 In this model of the complementar­
ity between agriculture and industry, we can see the implications of what happens if the terms 
of trade are not in equilibrium, as well as the checks to the expansion of industry that Lewis 
mentioned.
gA
0
Growth
Industrial
terms of
trade
Figure 5.3  Industrial terms of trade and agricultural growth rate
gI
0
Growth
Minimum
terms of
trade
Industrial
terms of
trade
Maximum
growth rate
Figure 5.4  Industrial terms of trade and industrial growth rate
163
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
If the terms of trade are not in equilibrium – if the price of food is ‘too low’ or ‘too high’ in 
relation to industrial goods – then industrial growth is either demand constrained or supply con-
strained. For example, if in Figure 5.5, the terms of trade were at P1, because the price of food was 
‘too low’, industrial growth would be demand constrained to g1 by a lack of agricultural purchas-
ing power over industrial goods. Industry could accumulate capital, but it could not sell its goods. 
Alternatively, if the terms of trade were below equilibrium at P2, industrial growth would be sup-
ply constrained to g2 because the price of food would be ‘too high’, impairing capital accumula-
tion in industry. Agriculture could buy, but industry could not supply. Growth is maximized at P*
We can now examine what happens if there are shifts in the curves. Clearly, shifts in the curves 
will cause both the growth rates and the equilibrium terms of trade to vary. An improvement 
in agricultural productivity that shifts gA outwards will mean both higher industrial growth and 
an improvement in the industrial terms of trade. The importance of agricultural productivity 
improvement could not be better illustrated. An improvement in industrial productivity will shift 
gI outwards, which will also mean higher industrial growth but at the expense of worse terms of 
trade for industry.8 If there is a tendency for real wages in industry to rise commensurately with 
productivity increases, however, the gI curve will remain stable and the terms of trade will never 
move against industry in favour of agriculture unless agricultural productivity falls and the gA 
curve shifts inwards.
The checks to industrial expansion in Lewis’s model are easily illustrated. A rise in the real wage 
in industry will shift the gI curve inwards, which will choke industrial expansion unless an equivalent 
increase in agricultural productivity shifts the gA curve outwards (see the earlier quote from Lewis).
A final implication of the model is that if, through time, agriculture is subject to diminishing 
returns, productivity in agriculture will fall, shifting inwards the gA curve and reducing the rate 
of industrial growth. If the gI curve is relatively stable, industrial growth depends fundamentally 
on the rate of land-saving innovations (technical progress) in agriculture to offset the effect of 
diminishing returns.
Rural–urban migration and urban unemployment
Lewis (1954) spoke of an urban–rural wage differential of approximately 30% to attract labour to 
the industrial sector. What has happened in recent years, however, is that the urban–rural wage 
differential has widened considerably beyond this level – there has been rural–urban migration on 
gI
gA
P 1
P 2
g1 g2
g*
P *
0
Growth
Industrial
terms of
trade
Figure 5.5  Growth equilibrium and disequilibrium
164
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
an unprecedented scale, but the expansion of the industrial sector has not generated sufficient 
employment for all those available to work. The urban–rural wage differential in China is over 300%, 
in Guatemala 300%, and in Vietnam 210% (World Bank, 2007). Migration has thus served to transfer 
unemployment from rural to urban areas, as described in Chapter 3. In 2008, for the first time in 
human history, the number of people living in urban areas exceeded those living in the rural sector. 
The informal economy of the urban sector harbours the bulk of unemployed labour in transition 
from the rural sector into industrial employment. The conclusion to be drawn is that the expected 
value of the urban wage, notwithstanding the probability of long spells of unemployment, still 
exceeds the wage in the rural sector, and as long as it does so, the process of migration will continue.
In these changed circumstances, development theory has focused its attention in recent years on 
urban unemployment and policies to combat it. Most of the models of the rural–urban migration 
process are pessimistic about reducing the level of urban unemployment by conventional means 
such as subsidies to labour or public works programmes in the urban areas. The reason is that migra-
tion from the land is made to be a function not only of the actual urban–rural wage differential but 
also of the level of employment opportunities. More employment opportunities reduce unemploy-
ment immediately but encourage more migration. It thus becomes an empirical question whether 
increasing the rate of growth of employment in urban areas will actually reduce unemployment. New 
migrants may exceed the number of new jobs created. The very real possibility exists that urban areas 
may be caught in a ‘high level unemployment equilibrium trap’ as long as surplus labour on the land 
remains and development policy concentrates new activity in established urban (industrial) centres.
One of the earliest and simplest models of the rural–urban migration process, which is also 
operational in the sense of being testable, is that of Todaro (1969, 1971). Let us consider its main 
features and implications.
The supply of labour to the urban sector is assumed to be a function of the expected urban– 
rural wage differential (d), where the expected urban–rural wage differential is equal to the actual 
urban wage times the probability of obtaining a job in the urban sector minus the average rural 
wage. Thus:
S 5 fs(d)
(5.1)
where S is the supply of labour to the urban sector and:
d 5 wπ 2 r
(5.2)
where w is the urban real wage, r is the average rural wage, and π is the probability of obtaining a 
job in the urban sector.
The probability of obtaining a job in the urban sector is assumed to be directly related to the 
rate of new job creation and inversely related to the ratio of unemployed jobseekers to the num-
ber of existing job opportunities,9 that is:
p 5  
gN
W 2 N 5  gN
U 	

(5.3)
where g is the net rate of new urban job creation, N is the level of urban employment, W is the 
total urban labour force,10 and U is the level of urban unemployment. Substituting equation (5.3) 
into equation (5.2) gives:
d 5  wgN
U  2 r
(5.4)
165
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
If it is assumed that migration will come to a stop when the expected urban wage equals the rural 
wage (that is, when d 5 0), we can derive from equation (5.4) the equilibrium level of unemploy-
ment as:
Ue 5  wgN
r

(5.5)
It can be seen from equation (5.5) that a reduction in the actual urban wage will reduce the equi-
librium level of unemployment, and a rise in the rural wage will also reduce it, but (paradoxically) 
an increase in the rate of new job creation will raise the equilibrium level of unemployment by 
increasing the probability of obtaining a job and encouraging migration. Whether policies such 
as wage subsidies can reduce unemployment therefore depends on whether the increase in the 
demand for labour as a result is greater or less than the induced supply.
From equation (5.5), we can solve for the equilibrium ratio of unemployment to employment 
and give some quantitative content to the model. Dividing both sides by N gives Ue/N 5 wg/r. 
Thus, for example, if the industrial wage is twice as high as the rural wage (w/r 5 2), and g 5 0.05, 
the equilibrium ratio of unemployment to employment will be 10%.
To consider the policy implications more fully, and to answer the question: Under what condi-
tions will the actual level of urban unemployment rise?, let us suppose that the rate of urban job 
creation is a function of the urban wage, w, and a policy parameter, a (e.g., a government policy 
variable to increase employment). Thus:
g 5 fd(w,a) 	
 'g
'a . 0
(5.6)
If the growth of urban labour demand is increased, the response of labour supply can be written as:
'S
'a 5  'S
'd 'd
'g 'g
'a
(5.7)
Now, from equation (5.4) by partial differentiation, we have:
'd
'g 5 w N
U
(5.8)
Substituting equation (5.8) into equation (5.7) gives:
'S
'a 5  'S
'd wN
U  'g
'a
(5.9)
There will be an increase in the absolute level of urban unemployment if the increase in supply 
in response to a policy change exceeds the increase in the absolute number of new jobs created, 
that is, if:
'S
'd wN
U  'g
'a . N 'g
'a
(5.10)
166
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Now, cancelling N and ∂g/∂a from both sides and multiplying both sides by d/w and U/W, the 
condition for unemployment to increase becomes:
'S/W
'd/d  .  d
w U
W 
(5.11)
or substituting equation (5.2) into equation (5.11):
'S/W
'd/d  .  wp 2 r
w
 U
W
(5.12)
In words, equation (5.12) says that unemployment will increase in the urban sector as a result of 
a policy change to increase employment if the elasticity of the urban labour supply (by migra-
tion) with respect to the urban–rural wage differential exceeds the expected urban–rural wage 
differential as a proportion of the urban wage times the unemployment rate. Equation (5.12) is 
clearly testable. It transpires, in fact, that equation (5.12) is satisfied with a very low elasticity. For 
example, suppose that the actual urban wage is twice the rural wage,11 that the probability of 
obtaining a job in the urban sector is 0.8 and that the unemployment rate is 10%, then the level 
of unemployment will increase if the elasticity of the urban labour supply with respect to the 
expected urban–rural wage differential is 0.03.
Note that the growth of total labour supply as a result of migration (∂S/W) is not the same 
thing as the rate of growth of migration (∂S/S), so that the elasticity of supply with respect to a 
change in job opportunities is not the same as the elasticity of migration with respect to a change 
in job opportunities. We could, however, convert equation (5.12) into the elasticity of migration 
with respect to ∂d/∂ by multiplying both sides of equation (5.10) by U/S instead of U/W. This 
would give:
'S/S
'd/d .  wp 2 r
w
 U
S 
(5.13)
Since the ratio of unemployment to migration (U/S) is much higher than U/W, the elasticity of 
migration itself would have to be higher than the elasticity of labour supply for unemployment 
to increase following a job expansion programme. If, as before, we assume that w/r 5 2, π 5 0.8 
and, say, U/S 5 2, the migration elasticity would have to exceed 0.6 for unemployment to rise. In 
principle, this elasticity is easy to estimate by specifying a migration function in which migration is 
a function of the expected urban–rural wage differential, holding constant other factors affecting 
migration. For an interesting case study on Tanzania, see Barnum and Sabot (1977), who estimate 
an elasticity of migration with respect to the urban wage itself, holding other things constant, of 
between 0.7 and 2.0.12
Disguised unemployment: types and measurement
We must now examine more critically the classical assumption of unlimited supplies of labour, 
defined as labour’s marginal product below the subsistence wage.
If the marginal product of labour in the rural sector is positive (which is not precluded in Lewis’s 
model as long as it is below the subsistence wage), the withdrawal of labour from the subsistence 
167
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
sector will reduce total output. To argue that development via unlimited supplies of labour is feas­
ible and relatively painless, one must implicitly assume that the marginal product of labour is virtu-
ally zero. The term disguised unemployment is usually defined loosely in this way. But the question 
arises of how workers can survive on the land if their marginal product is zero, or even positive but 
below subsistence. Who would employ such labour? Would output in the subsistence sector really 
remain unaffected if substantial quantities of labour migrated? In short, what precisely is meant by 
the term ‘disguised unemployment’? Can it be quantified, and what are we to make of the argu-
ment that industrial development in surplus labour economies is a relatively painless process?
Let us redraw Figure 5.1 from the point of diminishing returns and describe more formally 
three possible interpretations of the concept of disguised unemployment that are commonly 
found in the literature. Let A in Figure 5.6 be the actual number of workers employable. One pos-
sible measure of disguised unemployment is the difference between A and S, or the gap between 
the number of workers available for work and the amount of employment that equates the mar-
ginal product of labour and the subsistence wage. This is the definition of unlimited supplies of 
labour in Lewis’s model where, if the marginal product of labour is below the subsistence wage, 
landowners have no interest in retaining these workers and therefore do not compete for them 
with the industrial sector.
A second possible measure of disguised unemployment is the difference between A and D, or 
the gap between the actual number of workers available for employment and the level of employ-
ment at which the marginal product of labour is zero, which is sometimes referred to as the static 
surplus. This surplus is clearly less than if disguised unemployment is defined as labour with a 
marginal product below the subsistence wage.
A third measure of disguised unemployment is the difference between the actual number of 
workers available and the level of employment at which the marginal product of labour would be 
zero if some change occurred that enabled the same level of output to be produced with fewer 
workers. This is represented by a pivoting of the marginal product curve to MP1. Disguised unem-
ployment is now measured by the difference between A and U, which is sometimes referred to as 
the dynamic surplus. The dynamic surplus clearly embraces many ‘types’ of disguised unemploy-
ment because there are many reasons, particularly in developing countries, why labour productiv-
ity may be low and why small changes in technique and organization of production may release 
substantial quantities of labour.
There are three main ways of ascertaining whether surplus labour exists in the sense that 
labour’s marginal product is zero. The first is to examine instances where substantial numbers of 
MP1
MP
W
S
U
D
A
Marginal product of labour
0
Number of workers
Subsistence wage
Figure 5.6  Disguised unemployment
168
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
the agricultural labour force have been withdrawn from the land, either to work on some industri-
alization project or as the result of illness, and to observe whether agricultural output falls or not.
This method was followed by Schultz (1964), who examined the effect of the influenza epi-
demic in India in 1918–19, which killed approximately 8% of the agricultural labour force. He 
found that acreage and output during the following year declined, and concluded from this that 
surplus labour in Indian agriculture did not exist. An important criticism of Schultz’s study, how-
ever, is that he failed to distinguish between the summer and winter season of the year following 
the epidemic. Mehra (1966) has shown that summer production, which just followed the epi-
demic, was not in fact reduced and that the decline in agricultural production in 1919–20 found 
by Schultz was entirely due to a reduction in the winter crop, which could have resulted from low 
rainfall. Notwithstanding the criticism, this is one method of approach.
A second method of estimating the static surplus is to take the difference between the labour 
available and the labour required to produce the current level of agricultural output with given 
techniques, making due allowance for the seasonality of production. The estimate of the magni-
tude of surplus labour in this case will vary with local conditions, and what is regarded as a normal 
working day.
A third approach is to estimate agricultural production functions (see Chapter 4) to test 
whether the elasticity of output with respect to labour input is significantly different from 
zero. This approach indicates whether or not there is surplus labour, but does not measure its 
magnitude.
When discussing labour’s marginal product in agriculture and the extent of disguised 
un­
employment, two important distinctions need to be made: between harvest and non-harvest 
time; and between farms that hire labour and those that do not. Within the production function 
approach, this distinction is easily made explicit and is a fruitful approach for that reason. As far as 
the distinction between hired and non-hired labour is concerned, the marginal product of family 
labour is unlikely to be zero if workers are hired, nor can the marginal product of the hired workers 
be zero if they are paid.
We now turn to the measurement of the dynamic surplus, which is the difference between the 
actual labour employed and the labour required, given some small change in technique (including 
an increase in the number of hours worked per day).
Unfortunately, those investigators who have measured the dynamic surplus have generally not 
distinguished between the causes of the surplus, nor made explicit the assumptions on which 
their estimates of labour requirements are based, and this is a major reason why estimates and 
opinions differ on the extent and existence of disguised unemployment. If the surplus is measured 
simply by the difference between the amount of labour that, in the investigator’s opinion, should 
be necessary to produce a given output and the amount of labour that there actually is, this does 
not distinguish between the different causes of low productivity, such as poor health, lack of 
incentive, primitive technology or institutional factors. One interesting case study is by Foster and 
Rosenzweig (2010), who calculate that approximately 20% of the Indian agricultural workforce 
could be in dynamic surplus based on estimates of the minimum efficient scale of farms measured 
by the land–labour ratio. Increasing efficiency by expanding farm size could release substantial 
quantities of labour. The dynamic surplus in this case is related to unspecified barriers to land 
consolidation.
The simplest reconciliation between those who argue that there is such a phenomenon of dis-
guised unemployment, in the sense of a very low marginal product of labour in agriculture, and 
those who disagree, is provided by the distinction between the amount of labour time employed 
169
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
and the number of persons employed. In a wage payment system, it is extremely unlikely that 
labour would be used up to the point where its marginal product is zero. If the wage is positive, 
the marginal product will be positive too. But profit-maximizing behaviour is quite consistent 
with redundant labour. Labour is employed up to the point where the marginal product of a 
unit of labour time is equal to the wage, and disguised unemployment takes the form of a small 
number of hours worked per person. It is not that there is too much labour time but too many 
labourers spending it. Total output would fall if workers were drawn from the land, unless those 
remaining worked longer hours to compensate. How much disguised unemployment is estimated 
to exist depends on what is regarded as a normal working day. Estimates may be subjective, but 
unlimited supplies of labour exist in the classical sense provided those remaining on the land work 
harder or longer. Let us illustrate these points diagrammatically.
In Figure 5.7, total output is measured on the vertical axis above the origin, and the amount 
of labour time on the horizontal axis. Let L1 be the point where the marginal product of labour 
time is equal to the subsistence wage corresponding to total output, Q. The number of workers is 
measured on the vertical axis below the origin, so that the tangent of the angle 0YL1 (tan a) gives 
the average number of hours worked by each unit of labour. If the tangent of the angle 0XL1 is 
regarded as the normal length of a working day so that the same output, Q, could be produced by 
X labour instead of Y, the amount of disguised unemployment would be equal to XY. It can eas-
ily be seen that if there was a reduction in the labour force from Y to t and the number of hours 
worked per worker remained the same (that is, tan 0tS 5 tan 0YL1), total output would fall from 
Q to P. If the normal working day is considered to be longer or shorter than the hours given by tan 
b, the amount of disguised unemployment will be greater or less than XY.
Let us now give a practical example. Suppose a producer employs 10 workers (Y 5 10), each 
doing 5 hours’ work a day (tan a 5 5), and the marginal product of the 50th hour is equal to the 
subsistence wage (L1 5 50). If one worker leaves (say, Yt), total output will fall from Q to P unless 
the 9 workers now do the 50 hours’ work previously done by 10 workers; that is, the working day 
must be increased by five-ninths of an hour. The amount of disguised unemployment depends on 
what is considered to be a full day’s work. If 10 hours is considered normal, then only 5 workers 
would be required to do 50 hours’ work and 5 could be regarded as disguised unemployed.
The precise conditions under which the remaining labour force would supply more work 
effort have been formalized by Sen (1966). If workers are rational, they will work up to the point 
P
Q
Q
P
X
Y
t
S
L1
L2
b
Total output
Number of workers
0
Labour time
(hours)
Subsistence wage
a
Total
output
Marginal
product
Figure 5.7  The dynamic surplus
170
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
where the marginal utility of income from work (dU/dL) is equal to the marginal disutility of work 
 
(dV/dL). Now the marginal utility of income from work can be expressed as:
dU
dL  5  dY
dL #  dU
dY
(5.14)
where dY/dL is the marginal product of labour and dU/dY is the marginal utility of income. Welfare 
maximization therefore implies that:
dY
dL #  dU
dY 5  dV
dL
(5.15)
or:
dY
dL 5  dV
dY 4  dU
dY 5  Marginal disutility of work
Marginal utility of income
(5.16)
Sen (1966) defines the ratio of the marginal disutility of work to the marginal utility of income as 
the real cost of labour.
Now consider Figure 5.8. Equilibrium is at N where the marginal product is equal to the real 
cost of labour. The removal of one worker reduces total output from 0PXN to 0PX1N1, and mar-
ginal product rises from X to X1. Equilibrium will be restored again at N if the real cost of labour 
remains constant – that is, if the ratio of the marginal disutility of work to the marginal utility of 
income does not increase. If the real cost of labour rises, there will not be full compensation for 
output lost. In other words, disguised unemployment in the sense of zero marginal product (or 
full compensation for lost output) implies a non-increasing marginal disutility of work and a 
non-diminishing marginal utility of income. Sen (1966) gives a number of reasons why this may 
be the case for people near subsistence with little work and a lot of leisure; for example, rising 
aspirations and more public expenditure on things such as education may prevent the marginal 
utility of income from falling, and higher incomes may prevent the marginal disutility of work 
from increasing if people are better fed.
The amount of underutilized labour is likely to be greater, the less capitalistic the organization 
of agriculture. In fact, in the extreme situation of no wage payment system with no competitive 
P
W
P
X
N1
N
X1
0
Marginal
product
Real cost of labour
Hours worked
Figure 5.8  Effect of labour withdrawal
171
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
pressure and little desire to maximize, the distinction between a unit of labour and a unit of 
labour time becomes largely redundant, as in the classical model. It is perhaps this type of environ-
ment that the originators of the classical model mainly had in mind. In an extended family-type 
system, for example, the marginal product of both workers and labour time may be below the 
subsistence wage. It is the average product that matters for the group as a whole, not the product 
of the last worker or hour, and the average product may still be above the subsistence level when 
the marginal product of labour time is below it. It is difficult to represent both cases on the same 
diagram, but if the marginal product of labour is zero, the marginal product of labour time is 
bound to be zero (and probably negative), so we may continue to illustrate the argument in terms 
of labour time, as in Figure 5.9.
The basis of Figure 5.9 is the same as Figure 5.7. When the marginal product of labour time 
is zero at L2, the average product of labour time is P1, or PP1 in excess of the subsistence wage P. 
The amount of labour time could be extended to L3 without the average product of labour time 
falling below subsistence, and the amount of labour time could be made up of any combination 
of workers and hours worked. If the number of workers was Y1, they could work hours equal 
to the tangent of 0Y1L3 without the average product of labour time falling below subsistence. 
Even though the marginal product of labour time, L2L3, is negative, all workers can subsist if 
the total product is equally shared. A zero or negative marginal product of labour time is not 
inconsistent with rational worker behaviour if positive utility is attached to work, regardless of 
the effect on output.
Suppose, as in Figure 5.10, that the marginal product of a unit of labour time is zero after 4 
hours’ work but the marginal disutility of leisure is still negative at this point. The worker may 
substitute work for leisure, working, say, 6 hours, despite the fact that the marginal product of 
labour time is negative after the fourth hour. If such behaviour is observed, the presumption 
must be that the marginal utility attached to working exceeds the loss of utility resulting from 
a lower average product. The fact that people receive positive utility from work may partly 
explain why, in some societies, the time taken to do specific tasks seems to be much longer 
than in others.
P
Y
P1
P1
L2
L3
P
Y1
0
Marginal
and
average
product
Number of
workers
Average
product
Subsistence wage
Labour time
Marginal
product
a
a
Figure 5.9  Maximum sustainable labour
172
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Incentives and the costs of labour transfer
Whether workers are willing to work more intensively to compensate for lost production as labour 
migrates, or whether capital is substituted for labour to raise productivity, requires some discus-
sion of worker motivation and attitudes towards industrialization in general in a predominantly 
rural society.
Some economic incentive will almost certainly be required to induce agricultural labour to 
work extra hours. At the least, there will need to be goods with which to exchange their surplus 
production. It is sometimes argued, however, that peasant producers, accustomed to a traditional 
way of life, may not respond to such incentives – that their horizons are so limited that they have 
no desire to increase their surplus either by investing in capital or by working longer hours. The 
corollary of this argument is that as labour productivity increases, workers will ultimately reduce 
the number of hours they work. This is the notion of the backward-bending supply curve of 
effort, illustrated in Figure 5.11. SS is the supply curve of effort relating hours worked to the wage, 
determined by productivity. Total income is equal to the product of hours worked and the wage. 
Up to income level SWZX, supply responds positively to the wage. Beyond the wage SW, however, 
fewer hours will be offered. This is the point where the positive substitution effect of work for lei-
sure (leisure is more ‘expensive’ the higher the wage) is offset by a negative income effect because 
of low aspirations.
A backward-bending supply curve of effort is not necessarily indicative, however, that peasants 
work for a fixed income and no more. The total income from work effort will still increase as long 
W
W1
0
4
6
Subsistence level
0
18
20
Marginal utility
of leisure
Units of labour time
(hours)
Average
product
Marginal
product
24 hours’
leisure
Figure 5.10  The possibility of negative marginal product
W
S
S
Z
X
Hours worked
Wage
Figure 5.11  Backward-bending supply curve
173
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
as the number of hours worked falls less than in proportion to the increased wage. But the need 
for incentives implies a claim on the community’s real resources, which creates added difficulties 
for the argument that a pool of disguised unemployment can be used to build up ‘productive’ 
goods and expand the industrial sector in a ‘costless’ way. Not only may the opportunity cost of 
agricultural labour not be zero, but resource costs will also be involved in providing incentives to 
increase effort and productivity in order for resources to be released from agriculture in the first 
place. The resource costs will include the provision of investment goods in agriculture, consumer 
goods for peasant producers to buy, and social capital in the industrial sector to cater for migrants.
All this has an important bearing on the question of the valuation of labour in surplus labour 
economies when planning the social optimum allocation of resources and deciding on the degree 
to which activities in the industrial sector should be labour intensive. Even if labour’s opportunity 
cost is negligible, the resource costs of labour transference must be considered as a cost to the 
community in expanding the industrial sector.
There is also the question of increased consumption to consider. If the objective of a surplus 
labour economy is to maximize growth, as opposed to the level of current consumption, the 
transference of labour will also involve a further ‘cost’ in terms of increased consumption because 
there will be a reduction in the size of the capitalist surplus if labour is valued at its opportunity 
cost. Consider Figure 5.12, which represents the capitalist sector of the economy. On the normal 
assumption of profit maximization, labour will be employed up to the point where the marginal 
product of labour is equal to the industrial wage. The capitalist surplus is equal to WNX. But 
suppose the supply of labour to the industrial sector is assumed to be ‘costless’ to society and is 
given, by the planners, a notional (or shadow) wage of zero. In this planned system, labour would 
be employed up to the point L1. Given the industrial wage, W, and assuming the propensity to 
consume out of wages is unity, each additional unit of labour employed beyond L will involve 
consumption in excess of production. If LL1 additional labour is employed, the size of the invest­
ible surplus would be reduced by XX1L1. It follows that in an economy geared to growth, the 
relationship between the consumption and production of migrant labour must also be taken into 
account when estimating the costs to society of industrial expansion with surplus labour from 
agriculture. If, at the margin, additional saving is valued more than an additional unit of consump-
tion, the cost of a unit of labour transferred from agriculture to industry must include an allow-
ance for increased consumption.
N
W
X
L
0
Units of labour
Industrial wage
Marginal
product
Marginal product
L1
X1
Figure 5.12  The social valuation of labour
174
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Summary
•
• Agriculture plays a crucial role in the early stages of a country’s economic development. A 
surplus of agricultural output over subsistence needs – a marketable surplus – is required to 
feed labour in alternative activities, to release labour and to provide capital for investment in 
industry, to buy other domestically produced goods, and to provide foreign exchange to buy 
imports.
•
• A necessary condition for agriculture to make these various contributions to economic devel-
opment is an increase of productivity in agriculture. Agricultural productivity is extremely low 
in most developing countries, which accounts for why so many people are so poor.
•
• There are several reasons for low agricultural productivity, including poor geographic and cli-
matic conditions, a lack of investment and knowledge, the land tenure system, and urban bias 
in the allocation of resources for health, education and infrastructure.
•
• Land reform is needed in many countries in order to break up large inefficient estates, and to 
provide tenants with security of tenure so that they have the incentive to invest in new inputs.
•
• Attention needs to be paid to the pricing of agricultural goods to encourage a supply response 
in agriculture.
•
• The transformation of traditional agriculture requires new inputs such as new varieties of seeds 
and proper irrigation. Genetically modified (GM) food is a matter for debate. Finance for the 
purchase of new inputs is crucial.
•
• As productivity in agriculture rises, the agricultural sector and other sectors of the economy be-
come more and more interdependent. Industrial growth can be fuelled by the release of cheap la-
bour from agriculture. This is the essence of Arthur Lewis’s model of ‘economic development with 
unlimited supplies of labour’. The reinvestment of industrial profits drives industrial expansion.
•
• But industry needs a market for its goods, so the purchasing power of the agricultural sector is 
important. It is vital to get the terms of trade right between agricultural and industrial goods, if 
the growth of the economy is not to be demand constrained if the prices of agricultural goods 
are too low, or supply constrained because the prices are too high.
•
• Surplus labour on the land has led to a vast rural–urban migration process, which is swelling 
the amount of unemployment and underemployment in the cities of developing countries. 
Todaro’s model of rural–urban migration explains why migration is still so high despite the low 
probability of getting a job in the urban area.
•
• There are many different definitions of surplus labour, or different measures of so-called ‘dis-
guised unemployment’. The most important distinction is between the static surplus, which 
assumes that the marginal product of labour is zero, and the dynamic surplus, which is the 
amount of labour that could be released without agricultural output falling, providing some 
small compensating changes take place such as the remaining labour working longer hours or 
small improvements in techniques of production, which raise labour productivity.
•
• The transfer of labour from agriculture to industry or from rural to urban areas is not a costless 
process either for individuals or society at large. The economic and social costs of congestion 
and overcrowding in urban areas are particularly acute.
Appendix: the functioning of markets in agrarian societies13
In mature developed countries, markets tend to be specialized; the markets for land, labour and 
credit are segmented. Each market has its own set of institutions, which have their own special-
ized function. In developing countries, at least in poor rural communities, markets are different; 
175
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
­
transactions of all kinds are interlinked, with the terms of one transaction contingent on another. 
The land, labour and credit markets are interlocked. For example, landlords might provide 
credit to tenants and labourers in the slack season, when there is no income being generated, in 
return for a specific amount of labour in the peak season; or traders may grant credit to farmers in 
return for a specific amount of their crop at a pre-agreed discount price. These interlinked trans-
actions make many of the markets very imperfect, not least because they create serious barriers 
to the entry of new agents, and inefficiency in one market may be the cause, or consequence, of 
imperfections in another. Inefficiencies arise through lack of information, lack of incentives, the 
inability to enforce contracts and so on. Imperfect and inefficient markets are a characteristic 
feature of the economic functioning of poor developing economies, and they are the basis of 
informal institutional arrangements that govern economic behaviour in rural societies.
Below, there are separate discussions on the markets for land, labour and credit, but as we go 
along, we will see how they interlock. What we shall find is that the contract choices made by 
peasant farmers depend on the technological, economic and social conditions that exist in differ-
ent environments, which determine risks and transaction costs. Agricultural production has three 
distinguishing features: production is subject to uncertainty, production is seasonal and hired 
labour is required, and the costs of supervising labour are high. These all play a part in determining 
the institutional arrangements and types of contracts reached in different markets.
The land market
One of the characteristics of the market for land is that the volume of land transactions (buying 
and selling) relative to the stock of land is low. This has to do with the very inegalitarian ownership 
of land in poor countries, and a lack of property rights for a large number of people who work 
on the land. The high concentration of land ownership in a few hands, and lack of access to land, 
can have serious consequences for the overall development of an economy. Land may not be 
used efficiently, large tracts of land may not be fully utilized, food production is likely to be below 
potential, and those who might want to farm and work the land become migrants to already 
overcrowded cities.
The concentration of land, and the size distribution of farms, differ across continents. Latin 
America has by far the highest concentration of land ownership, with Gini ratios of over 0.8 in 
countries such as Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Colombia and Venezuela. In Asia, the concentration is 
less, but still high – with a Gini ratio in excess of 0.4 in Bangladesh, India, Thailand, Indonesia and 
Nepal. Latin America, unsurprisingly, also has the largest farms. The proportion of small farms of 
less than 5 hectares is less than 50% on average, and covers only 2% of the total land area. Ninety 
per cent of land is cultivated on farms in excess of 50 hectares. In Asia, by contrast, 90% of farms 
are less than 5 hectares, occupying over 50% of farmland. The figures on land concentration and 
farm size are summarized in Table A5.1. In Africa, the situation differs because much of the land is 
communally owned. The predominant form of farming is subsistence agriculture based on the vil-
lage. On large tracts of land, there is also shifting cultivation, although this type of farming is now 
on the decline because of increased pressure of population on food supplies. It has been replaced 
by small owner-occupied plots. There is virtually no sharecropping with large landlords.
There are not many economies of scale in farm production. In fact, it turns out that small farms 
produce a higher output per hectare than large farms (see Sen, 1964; Ray, 1998). One explanation 
is that labour is used more intensively on small (family-owned) farms because the opportunity 
cost of using labour is very low, whereas large farms hire labour and pay a market wage, which 
leads to a lower input of labour per unit of land. Owner-occupied farms using family labour are 
176
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
always found to be more productive than large mechanized farms using hired labour, or tenant 
farms with no property rights, because the incentive to be efficient is greater (see Binswanger and 
Deininger, 1997).
If small owner-occupied farms are more productive than large farms, there would be an effi-
ciency or productivity gain if large landowners were to sell their land to small family units and 
appropriate the surplus. But the market for land doesn’t work in this rational way. First, land con-
fers power, and can be used as collateral for other purposes. Second, in practice, most land sales 
are not from rich to poor, but from poor to rich because the poor often have to sell land in order 
to pay debts and survive, and they are credit constrained (see later). This matters for efficiency if 
tenants and sharecroppers replace owner-operated family farms. This is a collective action prob-
lem and the only solution is state involvement in land reform, which transfers land compulsorily 
from rich to poor.
Land reform can take three main forms:
1.	 The transfer of land from landowners to tenants who already work the land, as happened his-
torically in South Korea, Japan and Taiwan. South Korea is an interesting case where land re-
form took place when the country ceased to be a Japanese colony in 1949. Over one-half of 
agricultural land owned by Japanese and large domestic landowners was transferred to over 
60% of the rural population comprising tenant farmers.
2.	 The transfer of large estates to smaller farms, as happened in Mexico after the revolution in 
1917.
3.	 The expropriation and break-up of large estates for new settlements, as in some countries in 
Africa in recent times, but often with disastrous results, as in Kenya and Zimbabwe.
Table A5.1  Land concentration and farm size in Asia and Latin America
Countries
Gini ratio of land 
concentration
Percentage of farms and farmland
Percentage of 
sharecroppers 
or tenants
Below 5 hectares
Above 50 hectares
Asia
Farms
Area
Farms
Area
Bangladesh
0.42
90.6
62.6
–
–
91
India
0.62
88.7
46.7
0.1
3.7
48
Indonesia
0.56
92.9
68.7
0
13.6
60
Nepal
0.56
97.2
72.1
0
0.8
48.3
Philippines
0.51
84.8
47.8
0.2
13.9
79.3
Thailand
0.45
72.3
39.4
0
0.9
29
Latin America
Brazil
0.84
36.8
1.3
16.3
84.6
–
Costa Rica
0.82
48.9
1.9
14.5
79.7
9.4
Colombia
0.86
59.6
3.7
8.4
77.7
49.4
Peru
0.91
78
8.9
1.9
79.1
0
Uruguay
0.82
14.3
0.2
37.6
95.8
4.7
Venezuela
0.91
43.8
0.9
13.6
92.5
–
Source: Otsuka et al., 1992.
177
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
Historically, most land reforms have taken place at the same time as political change, which has 
transferred power from corrupt elites to ‘the people’ through the creation of democratic institu-
tions. Land reform is an important institutional change conferring property rights and providing 
incentives to invest.
Where tenant farmers exist, arrangements between tenants and landlords vary in different 
parts of the world. In Latin America, tenants tend to pay a fixed rent to the landlord for the right 
to cultivate, but retain 100% of the output. In Asia, tenants tend to be sharecroppers, sharing 
output with the landlord on an agreed percentage basis, depending on circumstances, usually 
50:50. With fixed rent contracts, the tenant bears the risk of fluctuations in output. Poor farmers, 
however, are risk averse, and so they tend to be sharecroppers, sharing the risk with the landlord. It 
is often argued that sharecropping is inefficient compared with fixed rent tenancies because work 
incentives are weaker. With fixed rents, tenant farmers keep any extra output produced, whereas 
sharecroppers have to relinquish a certain share, and thus there will be a tendency for sharecrop-
pers to undersupply effort (unless, of course, their work can be costlessly observed and enforced 
by the landlord). The empirical evidence shows (see Ray, 1998), however, that productivity on 
tenant-owned land is higher than on sharecropped land, controlling for other factors.
The question then arises: If sharecropping is inefficient, why is it so widely practised? The answer 
is that it can be beneficial to landowner and farmer by reducing the risks and costs to both. Stiglitz 
(1974) was the first to show formally that sharecropping reflects a compromise between risk-sharing 
and work incentives. From the landlord’s point of view, they can use a sharecropping contract 
as a screening device to choose between more wealthy, high-productivity tenants and poorer, 
lower productivity tenants – the former receiving the fixed rent contracts and the latter receiving 
the sharecropping contracts. Also sharecropping is cheaper, compared with self-cultivation using 
hired labour. Labour recruitment, and the supervision of labour effort, can be costly. This is a clas-
sic principal–agent example, where the interests of the landowner and the worker differ. The prin-
cipal (the landowner) naturally wants as much effort and output as possible, but work effort generates 
disutility and the worker may shirk. The landowner has no way of knowing how much of a worker’s 
output is dependent on their effort and how much on exogenous factors. The principal cannot easily 
monitor and enforce the work effort they want without employing supervisory staff. Sharecropping 
may also be the preferred contract if input costs are being shared between landlord and tenant. 
 
Cost-sharing inputs is a way of offsetting disincentive effects of applying inputs under output-sharing 
contracts (Otsuka et al., 1992). Cost-sharing can be thought of as production loans to the tenant, 
which are repaid with the output, which is deducted from total output before the output is shared.
From the tenants’ point of view, not paying a fixed rent considerably reduces risk because in 
the event of a bad harvest, tenants could find themselves in considerable difficulties, with their 
livelihood threatened. Landlords also know this. For the landlords, they can vary the share they 
get in order to get the same income as a fixed rent, taking good and bad years together. In fact, in 
recent years, the tenant’s share has been falling because landlords have been bearing the cost of 
increased mechanization. But greater overall efficiency will only come with giving sharecroppers 
a greater share of output, to induce more effort, and providing security of tenure on the land to 
provide tenants themselves with the incentive to invest.
The labour market
There are two main types of labour working in the rural sector of developing countries. The first is 
casual labour, hired on a daily basis and paid either a daily wage or ‘piece rates’ for specific tasks. 
Large landowners need more than family labour to work on their large estates, and if people are 
178
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
landless, or possess only very small farms, they need to earn extra income for nutrition and sur-
vival. The second type of labour is permanent labour hired by landlords on long-term contracts. 
The function of the two types of labour is different. Casual labour is used for routine tasks that are 
easily monitored. It will need a minimum income in order to have enough nutrition and energy 
to work productively – the so-called efficiency wage. If the labour is landless and has no other 
source of income, this is the minimum wage that will be paid. If the labour has other sources of 
income, however, either from a small farm or other assets, it can supply labour at a lower thresh-
old wage because the other income buys the nutrition it needs. On the other hand, as non-labour 
income rises, the minimum at which labour is willing to work rises because it values leisure more 
highly. Thus, there are conflicting forces working in the labour market (Ray, 1998). At low levels 
of non-labour income, the availability to work for a lower wage rate dominates, while at higher 
levels of non-labour income, the willingness to work dominates. This gives rise to two types of 
unemployment, or categories of surplus labour, in rural areas. The first category is ‘voluntary’ 
unemployment among labour able to work but who do not want to because of high non-labour 
income. The second category is ‘involuntary’ because the wage rate is not high enough to enable 
labour to work productively. In these circumstances, land reform and income distribution would 
increase total agricultural output, because if the landless are given land, the increase in their non-
labour income will increase their ability to work, and a lower level of income for the previously 
more ‘wealthy’ will increase the incentive to work. The necessity to pay a minimum efficiency 
wage is one of the reasons why wages tend to be rigid downwards in rural economies, despite 
unemployment. Another explanation is the phenomenon of segmented labour markets, with 
village employers hiring local labour even when it is cheaper outside. Institutions and social norms 
often determine economic outcomes, not the free forces of the marketplace.
The main drawback of the casual labour market from the point of view of economic devel-
opment is that employers of labour (landlords) have no interest in improving the working 
conditions of workers or investing in them by way of health or education, because there is no 
guarantee that they will reap the benefits. Ray (1998) commented, ‘a casual labour market 
creates a deterioration in the nutritional status of the workforce’. The function of permanent 
labour, and the argument for more permanent labour contracts, is that a lot of agricultural 
work needs supervising and large landowners require people to supervise and monitor work. 
One facet of permanent labour is labour-tying, which, because of the seasonal nature of pro-
duction, suits employer and employee. The employer is guaranteed labour in the busy season 
and the worker is guaranteed work in the off-season. The wage paid to permanent labour will 
be some margin above the casual wage to provide the incentive to monitor and supervise tasks 
properly. The premium must be just enough to prevent ‘shirking’, and also to compensate for 
the threat of dismissal.
Another way of enforcing work effort is to offer long-term contracts, so that a party not hon-
ouring a contract will suffer loss of reputation, and find it difficult to work in the future. In small 
rural communities, reputation matters. If long-term fixed wage contracts can elicit loyal effort 
from permanent workers, they may also receive fringe benefits and subsidized credit in return.
According to Ray (1998), however, the amount of permanent labour used on farms relative to 
casual labour has been falling in recent years. One reason may be that because of multiple crop-
ping, the seasonality of production has decreased, and therefore there is less need to offer per-
manent contracts to ensure labour is available in the harvest season. Second, if the casual wage in 
the harvest season is above the contracted income for permanent labour, it is difficult to enforce 
‘tied contracts’.
179
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
We can summarize this section on labour contracts by saying that when work effort is 
un­
enforceable, there are three basic predictions from a standard model of landlord and workers 
both attempting to maximize their utility in the face of production uncertainty and risk (Otsuka 
et al., 1992):
•
• If production is uncertain and the worker is risk averse, the share contract will be optimal. (If the 
worker is risk neutral, which is highly unlikely, the fixed rent contract would be chosen.)
•
• A share or fixed rent tenancy is superior to a fixed wage permanent labour contract because 
the latter is costly, but long-term and interlinked contracts may be observed because they can 
help to enforce contracts through reputation effects. Permanent labour contracts will also be 
observed if land tenancy is illegal.
•
• A share tenancy is less efficient than a fixed rent tenancy and owner cultivation because of 
reduced work incentives (unless labour can be monitored costlessly).
Where work effort is perfectly enforceable, optimal contracts are, in general, indeterminate. If the 
worker is risk neutral and contract enforcement is costless, all forms of contract become equally 
efficient. If both landlord and workers are risk averse, the share contract will be chosen to share 
production risk.
Credit markets
Farmers need credit for three main reasons: first, for fixed capital investment; second, to bridge 
the gap between financing production (seeds, fertilizers, pesticides) and sales receipts from the 
harvest (in other words, they need working capital); and third, to smooth consumption before 
the harvest.
Credit markets in the rural sector of developing countries are not well developed, however, for 
two main reasons. First, due to lack of information, it is difficult for lenders to monitor loans, to 
know how risky they are, and whether they are going to be used productively. Second, credit con-
tracts are difficult to enforce because the legal system is weak, therefore there is the risk of default. 
This makes the formal banking sector reluctant to lend to the rural sector. The risk of default 
means that the formal sector only lends to richer farmers with collateral. The poor may have some 
collateral in the form of a plot of land, but the formal banking system wants something more.
This means that the rural credit market is dominated by informal moneylenders, charging 
high interest rates either explicit in the form of high money rates of interest, or implicit because 
the loan is given in return for a share of the borrower’s output at a discount price, or an agreed 
amount of labour service at a lower-than-market wage. The rural credit market is also very seg-
mented. Because moneylenders have much more knowledge of borrowers within a local com-
munity, moneylenders tend to become very specialized, dealing with a particular clientele within 
a village or serving a particular type of person. Segmentation often takes place on occupational 
lines. Because of these links, lenders in informal markets do not like their borrowers borrowing 
from another lender, so the existence of many lenders does not necessarily mean there is com-
petition. Rather, the credit market is more like a series of local monopolies, and because of this 
segmentation, interest rates on loans in the informal market are not only high but can also vary 
considerably. There is little chance of arbitrage.
High interest rates largely reflect lenders’ risk; that is, the risk that the borrowers might not 
repay either because of adverse circumstance, such as a bad harvest, or because of the difficul-
ties of collecting bad debts. Potential default exists, but in practice, it turns out to be quite low. 
One reason is that in rural communities where everybody knows each other, if someone defaults, 
180
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
everybody knows and no one else will lend to them. There is ‘peer’ pressure to repay. The second 
reason is that moneylenders devise contracts that minimize the risk of default, which also makes 
the implicit interest rate high. If the lender is a large landowner, and the landowner knows the 
farmer, they can minimize the risk of default by making the first claim on the borrower’s output, 
or insist that the borrower supplies labour at a lower-than-market wage (bonded labour). If the 
lender is a trader, they can minimize risk by contracting to buy the output of the borrower at a 
discount price. Udry (1994) found that over 90% of loans to the rural sector in Northern Nigeria 
came from the informal sector. Research in the Punjab and Sindh regions of Pakistan shows that 
landlords are the major source of credit for tenant farmers, while traders are the major source of 
credit for owner-cultivators (Ray, 1998).
Even though risk of default can be minimized by various practices, credit-rationing still exists 
because high interest rates may attract too many high-risk customers, and high interest rates, 
which would equilibrate the supply and demand for loans, would themselves increase the risk of 
default. Lenders therefore prefer to ration credit instead.
There is also the issue of risk and insurance to consider. Agricultural production is risky because 
of the vagaries of the weather, the incidence of disease and many other factors. Peasant farmers 
somehow need to be able to smooth their income and consumption, so as not to suffer unduly 
in bad times. This is where insurance mechanisms are important. Self-insurance is one possibility, 
smoothing consumption using one’s own resources; for example, saving grain in good times for 
use in bad. Mutual insurance is another possibility. If farmers produce different products, and 
good and bad harvests for different crops are negatively correlated, producers can help each other 
out in what are bad times for some and good times for others. But mutual insurance may not be 
easily enforceable. There could be risk pooling within a community through formal insurance 
markets, but these are not well developed. If there is not risk pooling or mutual insurance, saving 
and credit have to be used for consumption smoothing. There is evidence from a wide variety of 
studies (see Bardhan and Udry, 1999) that households in poor, risky agricultural environments 
engage in risk pooling and consumption smoothing, although not always successfully because of 
informational and enforcement difficulties.
Interlinked markets
As we have indicated above, the markets for land, labour and credit in the rural sector of develop-
ing countries are closely interlinked. Inefficiency in one market may be both the cause and con-
sequence of inefficiencies in others. The markets for land and labour are interlinked because an 
imbalance in the market for land (with both large and small holdings) leads to imbalances in the 
market for labour. If people are landless, or have only very small holdings, they need to sell their 
labour to large landowners who need more than just family labour.
The markets for land and credit are linked because, as we have outlined before, landlords are 
a major source of credit for farmers, and their labour or output is used as collateral. Also crop-
traders are the main source of credit for cultivators who own land, and loans are provided in 
advance of crop production. In Muslim countries, where charging interest is against Sharia law, 
credit contracts, which take part of the output of the borrower, or specify the sale of the output 
at a certain discount, are a substitute for charging interest.
Floro and Yotopoulos (1991), in their study of the Philippines, identify five types of credit 
market interlinkages:
1.	 Credit in return for the procurement of output.
2.	 Credit in return for the sale of output to the lender.
181
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
3.	 Credit tied to the purchase of inputs or leasing machinery from the lender.
4.	 Credit in return for provision of labour to the lender.
5.	 Transfer of rights over the usufruct (profits) of the land to the lender.
Floro and Yotopoulous (1991) find that the first three types of interlinkages are most common 
among trader lenders, while the last two are most prevalent among farmer lenders.
In conclusion, in rural communities where formal lending is limited by lack of proper collateral, 
interlinked contracts in the informal money market make sense because the lender has more con-
trol over the borrower and saves the cost of monitoring, and reduces the risk of non-repayment. 
Landlords, or traders, in effect, get their ‘interest’ immediately if loans are conditional on work for 
lower wages or output at lower prices.
Institutions and decision-making in agriculture
Agriculture is a neglected sector of the economy in many developing countries, and governments 
pursue policies that discriminate against agriculture in favour of industry. The explanation is partly 
historical, but mainly institutional and political. The agricultural sector’s potential for collective 
action is weak because of the unequal relation between landlords and workers and the weak 
bargaining power that the agricultural sector has vis-à-vis other groups in society due to history 
and initial conditions. It is difficult for owner-operated family farms to act collectively to change 
things because farmers are dispersed and lack political clout. If peasant farmers lack education 
and cannot vote, they lack the means to promote change. Only by enhancing the poor’s potential 
for collective action, by increasing their potential participation, will there be increased efficiency 
and sustained and equitable growth in the rural sector (Binswanger and Deininger, 1997).
1.	 What is the importance to economic development of rapid productivity growth 
in agriculture?
2.	 What factors hold back productivity growth in agriculture?
3.	 How could land reform help to raise agricultural productivity?
4.	 What is meant by ‘marketable surplus’?
5.	 Explain why poor people tend to be risk averse and reluctant to innovate.
6.	 In what sense is there disguised unemployment on the land?
7.	 Does disguised unemployment on the land mean that development using surplus 
labour is a relatively painless and costless process?
8.	 Compare and contrast the main features of Lewis’s classical model of develop-
ment with the neoclassical model.
9.	 Explain the continued process of rural–urban migration despite growing unem-
ployment in urban areas.
10.	 In what ways do the agricultural and industrial sectors of an economy comple-
ment one another?
Discussion questions
Chapter 5
182
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Notes
  1.  
For excellent surveys of the issues, see Bardhan (1984), Binswanger and Deininger (1997), Dorner 
(1992), Otsuka et al. (1992) and Lipton (2011).
  2.  
See also Askari and Cummings (1976) and Schiff and Montenegro (1997).
  3.  
See also the symposium on the Lewis model to celebrate its 25th anniversary in the Manchester 
School, September 1979, Kirkpatrick and Barrientos (2004); the symposium on the Lewis model 
after 50 years, Manchester School, December 2004, and Gollin’s 60 retrospective in Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, Summer 2014.
  4.  
The capitalist sector is not synonymous with the industrial sector, but it is convenient to think of 
it in this way. Agribusiness, for example, is also capitalist.
  5.  
The profit rate can be expressed as
P/K 5 (O/L 2 w/p)
(K/L)
where P is profits, K is the quantity of capital, 0/L is the productivity of labour, w/p is the real 
wage and K/L is the capital–labour ratio. The profit rate will rise if 0/L rises and w/p remains 
the same (assuming no offsetting rise in K/L).
  6.  
A formal algebraic model, with various extensions, can be found in Thirlwall (1986).
  7.  
If the income elasticity of demand for industrial goods is greater than unity, and for agricultural 
goods less than unity, then the equilibrium growth rate for industry will exceed that for agriculture.
  8.  
See Weisdorf (2006) for historical evidence on how industrial growth promoted agriculture by 
lowering the relative price of industrial goods and buying more goods commercially rather than 
producing ‘non-agricultural’ goods within the agricultural sector itself.
  9.  
This is not a statistical probability, since π is not bounded between zero and unity. The ‘chance’ of 
getting a job would be a better word to use.
10.  
Todaro (1971) uses the same notation, S, for the total urban labour force as for the supply of 
migrants. This can be confusing. We therefore use W for the total urban labour force and S for the 
supply of migrants.
11.  
Any values can be substituted as long as w/r 5 2.
12.  
Other early studies of the rural–urban migration process include Knight (1972). For a survey of 
studies, see Todaro (1976), Yap (1977) and Stark (1991). Todaro gives an alternative way of evalu-
ating whether urban unemployment will rise or not. It can be shown that the level of unemploy-
11.	 What are the major characteristics of the market for land in the rural sector of 
developing countries?
12.	 What is the principal-agent problem facing landlords in the rural sector of poor 
countries?
13.	 Why is sharecropping so common in the agricultural sector of many poor 
­
countries?
14.	 In what ways is the credit market linked to the land and labour markets in the 
rural sector of poor countries?
Discussion questions – continued
Chapter 5
183
5  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  A G R I C U LT U R E  A N D  S U R P L U S  L A B O U R
ment will rise if h . g 3 N/S, where h is the period elasticity of induced migration with respect 
to the change in modern sector job probabilities, g is the growth of urban employment prior to 
the increase in job opportunities, N is the level of urban employment and S is the existing level 
of rural–urban migration. It can also be shown that the rate of urban unemployment will rise if 
 
h . g 3 W/S, where W is the urban workforce.
13.  
This section relies heavily on the works of Otsuka et al. (1992), Binswanger and Deininger (1997), 
Ray (1998) and Bardhan and Udry (1999).
Websites on agriculture
Food and Agricultural Organization www.fao.org/home/en/
International Food Policy Research Institute www.ifpri.org
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research www.cgiar.org
Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture www.iica.int/en
International Rice Research Institute www.irri.org
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center www.cimmyt.org
