59
•
• Introduction
•
• The dominance of agriculture and petty services
•
• Low level of capital accumulation
•
• Rapid population growth
•
• Exports dominated by primary commodities
•
• The curse of natural resources
•
• Weak institutional structures
•
• Other dimensions of the development gap
•
• Inequality: vertical and horizontal
•
• Growth and distribution
•
• Poverty-weighted growth rates
•
• Stages of development and structural change
•
• Rostow’s stages of growth
•
• Diversification
•
• Industrialization and growth
•
• Kaldor’s growth laws
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Notes
•
• Websites on structural change and income distribution
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF 
UNDERDEVELOPMENT AND 
STRUCTURAL CHANGE
3
60
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Introduction
This chapter is about the distinguishing characteristics of poor developing countries, and the pro-
cess of structural change necessary for a rise in living standards. There cannot be an increase in 
living standards and a reduction in poverty without an increase in output per head of the working 
population or an increase in labour productivity. This is the sine qua non of development. Rich 
countries have high levels of labour productivity, poor countries have low levels of productivity. 
Why is productivity low in poor countries, and what are the major sources of productivity growth?
The major distinguishing characteristics of poor countries that contribute to low levels of 
prod­
uctivity and poor economic performance are: the dominance of low-productivity agriculture 
and petty service activities in the economic structure; low levels of capital formation, physical and 
human (education); rapid population growth; and exports dominated by primary commodities. 
Some of these major characteristics of underdevelopment are both causes and effects of poverty; 
for example, low savings and investment, poor education, and rapid population growth can be 
causes of poverty but also symptoms.
In addition to these major distinguishing features of poor countries, some suffer from what is 
called ‘the curse of natural resources’, which refers to the detrimental effects that high depend-
ence on natural resource exploitation and exports can have on an economy, because of an over-
valued exchange rate (the Dutch disease), corruption and rent-seeking behaviour.
Many poor countries possess weak institutional structures such as lack of property rights, 
absence of the rule of law and political instability, all of which act as disincentives to investment.
In this chapter we also discuss many other dimensions of poverty in poor countries such as 
unemployment, income inequality, and the basic needs of people.
The chapter ends with a discussion of the stages of growth and development that countries 
go through, and the strong association that seems to exist between the progress of nations and 
the shift of resources from agriculture into industry and sophisticated service activities, known in 
the literature as Kaldor’s growth laws. The fastest growing developing countries today are those 
where the share of industry in GDP is rising the fastest; and this is no accident, because manufac-
tured goods have production and demand characteristics that make them the ‘engine of growth’.
The dominance of agriculture and petty services
One of the major distinguishing characteristics of poor developing countries is the fact that their 
economies are dominated by agriculture and petty service activities. There is very little manufac-
turing industry in many of the poorest countries. Table 3.1 shows the distribution of employment 
by sectors of the economy in low-, middle- and high-income countries in different continents. 
It can be seen that in low-income countries, a large proportion of the labour force still relies 
on agriculture to make a living: 71% in sub-Saharan Africa and 67% in South Asia. By contrast, 
the proportion engaged in agriculture in high-income countries is less than 5%. The proportion 
employed in industry in low-income countries is very low – only 7% in sub-Saharan Africa. In 
high-income countries, employment is dominated by high-productivity service activities.
Most of those working on the land in poor countries are either subsistence farmers (producing 
only for themselves), tenant farmers (with no land rights and no incentive to increase output) or 
landless labourers (selling their labour in a daily labour market). Some high-productivity commer-
cial agriculture does exist, but it forms a small proportion of total agricultural activity. The domin­
ance of agriculture has a number of implications and poses a number of problems for developing 
61
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
Table 3.1  Distribution of employment, by sector (percentage)
Region
Agriculture (%)
Industry (%)
Services (%)
Asia and the Pacific
53.7
17.9
28.4
Eastern Asia
34.8
23.8
41.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
43.3
10.8
45.9
South-Eastern Asia and the Pacific
50.1
16.8
33.1
Southern Asia
67.5
14.6
17.9
Sub-Saharan Africa
71.2
7.1
21.7
Asia and the Pacific
43.8
21.8
34.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
28.7
18.2
53.1
South-Eastern Asia and the Pacific
38.1
19.0
42.9
Southern Asia
46.0
23 .0
31.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
49.0
10.9
40.2
Asia and the Pacific
24.5
25.7
49.8
Eastern Asia
24.0
25.7
50.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
15.2
21.2
63.6
South-Eastern Asia and the Pacific
34.3
22.0
43.7
Southern Asia
19.8
32.0
48.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
18.8
16.1
65.1
Asia and the Pacific
4.0
25.5
70.5
Eastern Asia
4.2
26.2
69.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.9
22.5
72.7
South-Eastern Asia and the Pacific
2.9
21.2
75.9
Source: ILO, 2015, Table R4.
Lower middle  
income
Upper middle  
income
Lower income
High income
countries. First, agriculture is a diminishing returns activity because cultivatable land is ultimately 
a fixed factor of production. There are only a few incontrovertible laws in economics, but one is 
that if a variable factor is added to a fixed factor, its marginal product will eventually fall: the law 
of diminishing returns. This principle is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
As labour is added to the land, the marginal product of labour first rises because land requires 
a certain amount of labour for each unit of labour to work with maximum efficiency, but then 
the marginal product declines and could become zero (or even negative in extreme cases where 
Figure 3.1  The law of diminishing returns
Subsistence
wage
Labour
Marginal
product
of labour
(MP)
L*
MP
62
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
there is so much labour on a fixed piece of land that everyone gets in each other’s way, reducing 
total output).
If the marginal product of labour falls below the subsistence level, the unit of labour will not be 
able to survive unless total output is shared. This may characterize family farms. If labour is hired, 
however, or works on commercial farms, no (profit-maximizing) employer will pay a wage above 
the marginal product of labour. We reach the conclusion that in a diminishing returns activity, 
such as agriculture, there is always a limit to employment set by the minimum subsistence wage. 
This can lead to unemployment, open or disguised (see Chapter 5), particularly in a society where 
the population is growing rapidly and there are limited alternative employment opportunities.
Second, on the demand side, the demand for most agricultural products (and other primary 
products derived from the land) is income inelastic. This means that the rise in demand is pro-
portionately less than the rise in income, and the growth of demand for agricultural output is less 
than the growth of supply potential determined by the growth of the labour force plus the growth 
of labour productivity. For example, suppose that the agricultural labour force is growing at 2% 
and labour productivity is growing at 1%, so that the growth of productive potential in agricul-
ture is 3%. Now suppose that income growth in the economy is 3% but the income elasticity of 
demand for agricultural products is only one-half (0.5). The demand for output therefore grows 
by only 1.5%. The gap between the growth of potential supply and demand is 1.5%, which will 
manifest itself in unemployment.
There are thus two major causes of surplus labour in agriculture: one arises from the low 
income elasticity of demand for agricultural output; the other arises from the fact that agriculture 
is a diminishing returns activity, so that there is a limit to the employment of (paid) labour set by 
the minimum subsistence wage. What happens to this surplus labour? First, it may stay in the rural 
sector and work is spread, with each unit of labour working a suboptimal day. This is described 
as disguised unemployment (see Chapter 5). This, of course, depresses labour productivity and 
therefore per capita income. Second, the surplus agricultural labour may migrate to the towns to 
find alternative work. If work cannot be found in the formal sector of the economy, the labour 
attempts to make a living in the informal sector by providing petty services of various kinds: 
street trading, haircutting, shoe-shining, transport and so on. These are also very low-productivity 
activities.
Industry has very different characteristics from agriculture. First, it is not a diminishing returns 
activity. If anything, it is an increasing returns activity. All factors of production are variable, and 
no limit to employment is set by the marginal product of labour falling below the minimum 
(subsistence) wage. Second, the demand for most industrial goods is income elastic so that the 
demand for labour may rise faster than labour productivity, leading to increases in employment – 
at least in the early stages of industrialization. Also, there is greater scope for capital accumulation 
in industry, which enhances labour productivity. Overall, the productivity of labour in industry is 
much higher. As discussed later, there is a strong association across countries between the level 
of per capita income, and the share of resources devoted to industrial activities, and between the 
growth of industry and the growth of economies as a whole.
Low level of capital accumulation
A second major distinguishing characteristic of developing countries is their low level of capital 
accumulation – both physical and human. Physical capital refers to the plant, machinery and 
equipment used in the production of output. Human capital refers to the skills and expertise 
63
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
embodied in the labour force through education and training. (The role of education in the devel-
opment process will be discussed in Chapter 7.) Low levels of capital accumulation are a cause 
of low productivity and poverty, but are also a function of poverty, because capital accumulation 
requires investment and saving and it is not easy for poor societies to save. The process of develop-
ment can be described as a generalized process of capital accumulation, but the levels and rates 
of capital accumulation in poor countries are low. The amount of physical capital that labour has 
to work with in a typical developing country is no more than one-twentieth of the level in Europe 
and North America. This reflects the cumulative effect over time of much higher savings and 
investment ratios in rich countries.
The saving and investment ratios for various regions are shown in Table 3.2. Domestic invest-
ment can differ from domestic saving owing to capital inflows from abroad. This can be seen in 
Table 3.2 for the low-income countries where domestic saving is only 16% but gross capital forma-
tion is 28%. Notice the high ratios of savings and investment in East Asia and the Pacific region. 
In general, savings and investment rise with development and then fall, as shown by the figures 
for the high-income countries. If we exclude China, the savings ratio of low-income countries is 
less than half that of the middle- and high-income countries, although their investment ratio is 
still relatively high because of capital inflows from abroad. These are not always stable, however.
Sir Arthur Lewis, distinguished development economist, once described development as the 
process of transforming a country from a net 5% saver and investor to a 12% saver and investor.1 
Walt Rostow, in his well-known book The Stages of Economic Growth (1960), defines the take-off 
stage of self-sustaining growth in terms of a critical ratio of savings and investment to national 
income of 10–12% (see below for a discussion of Rostow’s model). What is the significance of 
this ratio? It has to do with a very simple growth formula, which originally came from the growth 
model of British economist (Sir) Roy Harrod (see Chapter 4). The formula is:
g 5 s/c
(3.1)
where g is the growth of output (ΔY/Y), s is the savings ratio (S/Y) and c is the incremental 
 
capital–output ratio – that is, how much investment is associated with an increase in the flow of 
Table 3.2  Savings and investment as a percentage of GDP, 2014
Gross capital formation
Gross savings
Low income
28
16
Middle income
31
31
Lower middle income
27
29
Upper middle income
32
32
Low and middle income
31
31
East Asia and Pacific
42
45
Europe and Central Asia
21
16
Latin America and Caribbean
21
18
Middle East and North Africa
30
–
South Asia
30
31
Sub-Saharan Africa
22
16
High income
20
21
Source: World Bank, 2015.
64
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
output by one unit (I/ΔY). Substituting these definitions of s and c into equation (3.1) shows that, 
in an accounting sense, the formula is an identity since in the national accounts S 5 I
ΔY/Y 5 (S/Y)/(I/ΔY)
(3.2)
That is, if S 5 I, then g 5 s/c.
Now, for the level of per capita income to rise, output growth must exceed population growth. 
If population growth is 2% per annum, output growth must exceed 2% per annum. It can be seen 
from equation (3.1) that how much saving and investment as a proportion of national income is 
required for growth depends on the value of the incremental capital–output ratio (c). If 4 units of 
capital investment are required to produce a 1 unit flow of output year by year over the life of the 
investment, then c 5 4, so s must exceed 8% for the growth of output to exceed 2%. A net rate of 
saving and investment to national income of at least 8% or more is therefore necessary if there is to 
be sustained growth of per capita income. In most developing countries, the net savings and invest-
ment ratio is above this critical magnitude, but the fact remains that a major cause of low produc-
tivity and poverty in developing countries is the low level of capital that labour has to work with. In 
Case example 3.1, the interrelationship between saving, investment and growth is discussed.
Rapid population growth
A third distinguishing feature of most developing countries is that they have a much faster rate of 
population growth than developed countries – in fact, their population is growing faster than at 
any time in the world’s history (see Chapter 11 for a full discussion). This can confer advantages, but 
Case example 3.1
The interrelationship between savings, investment and growth
The relationship between savings, investment and growth is complex, with causality 
running in several different directions, but recent research suggests two important 
conclusions: first, saving often seems to follow, rather than precede, investment and 
growth (contrary to orthodox theory); and second, investment and innovation are the 
centrepieces of growth.
Saving may not be the chief driving force behind growth, but ensuring an adequate 
savings level must remain a central policy concern – to ensure enough financing for 
capital accumulation and to prevent inflationary pressures or balance of payments 
disequilibrium, or both. And encouraging private saving may be essential to expand in-
vestment, considering capital market imperfections and liquidity constraints on firms 
and households in many developing countries. Four main policy conclusions emerge:
1	 Public saving does not crowd out private savings one to one, so increasing public 
saving is an effective direct way to raise national saving
2	 Foreign saving should be allowed to support domestic investment
3	 Higher private saving should not be expected in response to the liberalization of 
interest rates. Pension reform may be a better way to raise domestic savings
4	 The best way to promote investment and growth is a supportive policy and insti-
tutional environment ensuring macroeconomic stability, social consensus, and a 
low cost of doing business.
Source: Schmidt-Hebbel et al., 1994.
65
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
it also imposes acute problems. Population growth in the developing countries as a whole averages 
1.3% per annum, resulting from a birth rate of 24 per 1,000 population (or 2.4%) and a death rate of 
11 per 1,000 population (or 1.1%). The rapid acceleration of population growth compared with its 
historical trend is the result of a dramatic fall in the death rate without a commensurate fall in the 
birth rate. Population growth in developed countries averages no more than 0. 6% per annum. The 
population growth rate in low-, middle- and high-income countries is shown in Table 3.3. Population 
growth in low-income countries is over four times higher than in high-income countries.
Table 3.3  Population growth (average % per annum)
2000-05
2005–10
2010–15
Low income
2.72
2.69
2.69
Middle income
1.28
1.21
1.18
High income
0.59
0.69
0.52
Source: UN DESA, 2015.
Table 3.4  Primary commodities as a percentage of total exports, 2014
East Asia and Pacific
13
Latin America and Caribbean
43
Middle East and North Africa
84 (2006)
South Asia
35
Sub-Saharan Africa
73
Source: World Bank, 2015, Table 4.4.
Rapid population growth, like low capital accumulation, may be considered as both a cause 
and a consequence of poverty. High birth rates are themselves a function of poverty because 
child mortality is high in poor societies and parents wish to have large families to provide insur-
ance in old age. High birth rates also go hand in hand with poor education, a lack of employ-
ment opportunities for women, and ignorance of birth control techniques. Population growth, 
in turn, helps to perpetuate poverty if it reduces saving, dilutes capital per head, and reduces the 
marginal product of labour in agriculture. The pressure of numbers may also put a strain on gov-
ernment expenditure, lead to congestion and overcrowding, impair the environment, and put 
pressure on food supplies – all of which retard the development process, at least in the short 
run. In the longer run, population growth may stimulate investment and technical progress, and 
may not pose such a problem if there are complementary resources and factors of production 
available, but the short-run costs may outweigh the advantages for a considerable time.
Exports dominated by primary commodities
A fourth distinguishing characteristic of developing countries is that their trade tends to be domi-
nated by the export of primary commodities and the import of manufactured goods. This has 
consequences for the terms of trade of developing countries, the distribution of the gains from 
trade between developed and developing countries, and the balance of payments situation – all 
of which may adversely affect real income per head. Table 3.4 shows primary commodities as a 
percentage of the total exports of different continents. The trade of Africa, the Middle East, Latin 
66
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
America and the Caribbean is still dominated by primary commodities. Only Asia and the Pacific 
region have made headway in reducing dependence on commodity exports.
The barter terms of trade measures the ratio of export prices to import prices. There has been 
a historical tendency for the terms of trade of primary goods relative to manufactured goods to 
deteriorate over the past 100 years or so – by about 0.5% per annum on average. This tendency 
is known in the literature as the ‘Prebisch–Singer thesis’ (see Chapter 15). The falling price of 
exports relative to imports reduces the real income of a country because more exports have to be 
exchanged to obtain a given quantity of imports.
A second point to note is that the income elasticity of demand for primary commodities in 
world trade is less than unity, while the income elasticity of demand for manufactured goods is 
greater than unity. This means that as world income grows, the demand for primary commodities 
grows at a slower rate, but if developing countries grow at the same rate as the world economy, 
their demand for manufactured imports grows at a faster rate. As a consequence, developing 
countries specializing in the production and export of primary commodities suffer acute balance 
of payments difficulties. Often, the only means available to developing countries to adjust the 
balance of payments is to slow down their economies in order to reduce the growth of imports.
The prices of primary commodities are also more cyclically volatile than the prices of manufac-
tured goods. This can also cause havoc with a country’s balance of payments and its tax revenues 
if it relies heavily on trade taxes. The resulting instability makes planning difficult and may deter 
private domestic investment and investment from overseas.
For all these reasons, the structure of trade poses severe problems for many developing coun-
tries and may keep countries poorer than they would be if they were able to produce and export 
more industrial goods. It is not possible to understand the growth and development process – and 
the perpetuation of divisions in the world economy – without reference to the unequal trading 
relations between rich and poor countries and the balance of payments consequences of special-
izing in primary commodities.
The curse of natural resources
In general, it seems to be the case that the more natural resources a country has, the worse it per-
forms. This phenomenon is referred to in the literature as the curse of natural resources (Sachs 
and Warner, 2001; Gylfason, 2001). This is illustrated in Figure 3.2, which shows a scatter diagram 
for 105 countries of the relationship between the growth of per capita income over the period 
1965–98, and the share of the labour force employed in the primary sector. There is a very strong 
negative relationship (R2 5 0.7218), and the regression coefficient of −0.0871 indicates that a 
country with a primary sector share 10 percentage points above the average has experienced a 
growth of per capita income of nearly 1 percentage point below the average (controlling for the 
initial level of per capita income). This represents a substantial loss of welfare.
The same negative pattern emerges when the growth of per capita income is regressed against 
the export of natural resources as a share of GDP; and the negative relation persists even when 
controlling for other variables, such as differences in the level of investment between countries, 
and climate and geography (Sachs and Warner, 2001). Most countries that have grown rapidly in 
recent decades started as resource poor, not resource rich. There are exceptions to this general 
rule – countries such as Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Botswana, for example – but most of 
these exceptional countries have grown fast not through the exploitation of natural resources but 
through diversification into manufacturing industry.
67
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
What lies behind this ‘curse of natural resources’? A number of interrelated factors can be 
mentioned that seem to have an adverse effect on many of the important determinants of devel-
opment. Gylfason (2001) shows a negative relation across countries between the share of the 
primary sector in the labour force and export performance, domestic and foreign investment 
and education, and a positive relation with the size of external debt, the level of protection, cor-
ruption and income inequality. We have already seen why primary production can lead to poor 
export performance because many natural resources are income inelastic and suffer terms of 
trade de­
terioration, but why should natural resource-abundant countries neglect investment and 
education, and be more corrupt? There are two major explanations.
First, natural resource abundance may ‘crowd out’ other activities through two mechanisms: 
higher wages or earnings in the natural resources sector discouraging entrepreneurial activity and 
innovation in other sectors; and revenues from natural resource exports keeping the exchange 
rate artificially high, which makes the rest of the economy uncompetitive. This is known as the 
Dutch disease – so named because of the effect that the discovery of natural gas in Holland in the 
1960s had on the exchange rate and other sectors of the economy. Sachs and Warner (2001) test 
this ‘crowding-out’ hypothesis across 99 countries and find a positive correlation between natural 
resource abundance and the domestic price level. The higher relative price level is then found to 
impede the export growth of manufactured goods. It could also be that a country rich in natural 
resources simply neglects to develop other sectors of the economy.
A second major explanation why natural resource abundance may lead to poor performance is 
that the rents from natural resources may be misused by politicians and bureaucrats. Democracy 
and the rule of law seem to be inversely related to natural resource abundance, and Gylfason 
(2001) shows corruption to be more widespread in natural resource-abundant countries. This is 
not surprising since limiting access to a resource provides a rent, and where the state owns the 
resource, bureaucrats will take bribes in return for exploitation rights. Rent earners may not be 
interested in schooling and education, having lined their own pockets and those of their children, 
without acquiring an education. Thus, rent-seeking leads to low levels of expenditure on educa-
tion and school enrolment. It is also the case that the primary sector of an economy does not have 
the same educational needs as a more diversified economy.
Figure 3.2  Natural resources and economic growth
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
y = –0.0871x + 4E–05
Singapore
Hong Kong
Korea
0
20
40
60
80
100
R2 = 0.7218
Share of primary sector in labour force 1965–98 (%)
–10
–12
Growth of GNP per capita 1965–98,
adjusted for initial income (%)
68
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Weak institutional structures
Economies cannot function in an institutional vacuum, otherwise there is economic (and political) 
chaos. At the very minimum there has to be the rule of law, the protection of property rights, and 
constraints on power and corruption if private individuals are to be entrepreneurial, to take risks and 
invest. In many developing countries, the rule of law and the protection of property rights is still rudi-
mentary, and politicians (and bureaucrats) abuse their powers. Many economists (e.g. Acemoglu, 
2003; Rodrik, 2007) have argued that it is weak institutional structures that are the fundamental cause 
of underdevelopment, because the character of institutions is the determinant of all the proximate 
causes of progress such as investment, technology, education and trade. There are several measures 
of institutional quality that economists focus on, and they will be discussed in detail in Chapter 8. 
Three main ones are: the extent of legal protection of private property, the quality of governance 
(including the strength of the rule of law), and the limits placed on political leaders. Attempts have 
been made to distinguish econometrically the relative importance of institutions compared with 
other factors (including geography) in explaining different levels of per capita income across the 
world, with interesting, but controversial, results. Rodrik et al. (2004) take a large sample of devel-
oped and developing countries, measuring the quality of institutions mainly by a composite indica-
tor of a number of elements that capture protection afforded by property rights, and conclude: ‘Our 
results indicate that the quality of institutions overrides everything else. Controlling for institutions, 
geography has, at best, weak direct effects on income … similarly trade … has no direct positive 
effect on income.’ Easterly and Levine (2002) also test the influence of institutions compared with 
geography and policy variables across 75 rich and poor countries and find that institutions seem to 
matter most as the determinant of per capita income. Even countries with ‘bad policies’ do well with 
good institutions. We will examine the evidence for this in more detail in Chapter 8.
It is recognized, however, that the correlation found between institutions and economic 
development could reflect reverse causality, or omitted factors. We need to find a source of 
ex­
ogenous variation in institutions where institutions differ or change independently of other fac-
tors. Acemoglu et al. (2001) argue that the different experience of colonization is one exogenous 
source where, at one extreme, colonizers set up exclusively extractive institutions (to exploit min-
erals and other primary products) – such as slavery and forced labour – which neither gave prop-
erty rights to inhabitants nor constrained the power of elites. This was the experience in Africa and 
Latin America. At the other extreme, colonizers created settler societies, replicating the European 
form of institutions protecting private property and controlling elites and politicians, in countries 
such as Australia, New Zealand and North America. But what determined why some countries 
were settled and others not? Acemoglu et al. (2001) argue that the major determinant was the 
mortality rate faced by the early settlers, and that there is a strong negative correlation between 
past mortality rates and current institutional quality (because institutions persisted) and between 
past mortality and the current levels of per capita income. In fact, over 50% of the variation in per 
capita income across the 75 countries is associated with variation in one particular index of institu-
tional quality, which measures ‘protection against expropriation’. Acemoglu et al. (2001) conclude:
There is a high correlation between mortality rates faced by soldiers, bishops and sailors in 
the colonies and European settlements; between European settlements and early measures of 
institutions, and between early institutions and institutions today. We estimate large effects of 
institutions on income per capita using this source of variation. … this relationship is not driven 
by outliers, and is robust controlling for latitude, climate, current disease environment, religion, 
natural resources, soil quality, ethnolinguistic fragmentation, and current racial composition.
69
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
But this is where the controversy starts because presumably the mortality rates of the early set-
tlers, which affected the nature of institutions, was strongly influenced by geography because 
this affects disease. In the same vein, Sachs (2008) argues that Acemoglu et al.’s (2001) finding 
concerning the negative relation between mortality rates 200 years ago and per capita income 
today is simply picking up the pernicious effects of malaria (which still persists), not institutions. 
Development is not simply about good government and institutions. Institutions might make 
anti-poverty policies more effective, but that is all. Poor countries need resources to fight disease, 
to provide education and infrastructure, and all the other resource prerequisites of development. 
Sachs (2008) classifies three types of countries combining institutions and geography, which is a 
sensible approach:
•
• Countries where institutions, policies and geography are all reasonably favourable, for example 
the coastal regions of East Asia.
•
• Countries with favourable geography, but weak institutions, for example many of the transition 
economies of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
•
• Countries impoverished by a combination of unfavourable geography, such as landlocked 
countries and those plagued with disease, and poor governance, for example many of the coun-
tries of sub-Saharan Africa.
One manifestation of poor governance and weak institutions is wars both within countries 
(civil wars) and between countries. According to Oxfam (2007), conflicts in Africa since 1990 have 
cost the continent $150 billion, equivalent to the total amount of foreign aid received over the 
same period. The economic damage to economies is immense. In countries such as the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda, for example, wars have reduced national output by 
over 20%. This is the ‘conflict trap’ referred to by Collier (2007) in his book The Bottom Billion. In 
war-torn countries, inflation, debt and unemployment are all higher, public investment in edu-
cation, health and infrastructure suffer, life expectancy is lower, and people are more prone to 
disease and malnourishment.
Other dimensions of the development gap
Deprivation in developing countries is not simply a matter of low levels of per capita income. 
There are many other dimensions to the development gap between rich and poor countries. 
Developing countries generally experience much higher levels of unemployment – open and dis-
guised – than developed countries. The levels of education, health and nutrition are often abys-
mally low, and income distribution tends to be much more inegalitarian. Policy in developing 
countries is increasingly concerned with these other features of the development gap. The basic 
needs approach to development, originally pioneered by the World Bank, is a reflection of this 
switch of emphasis from exclusive concern with per capita income to these wider development 
issues. Here, we consider unemployment and the distribution of income. In Chapter 7, we discuss 
education, health and nutrition.
Unemployment
The developing countries contain a huge reservoir of surplus labour. For a long time, poor coun-
tries, particularly since the population explosion, have been characterized by underemployment 
or disguised unemployment in rural areas (see Chapter 5). What has happened in recent years is 
70
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
that disguised rural unemployment has transferred itself into disguised and open unemployment 
in the towns. Unemployment in the urban areas of developing countries is another dimension of 
the development problem and an increasingly serious one. The rationale for rural–urban migra-
tion will be considered later, but first it is appropriate to outline some of the facts on employment 
and unemployment. According to the International Labour Organization (ILO, 2009) in Geneva, 
1 billion people in developing countries are either jobless or underemployed, which amounts to 
one-third of the total working-age population.
This represents a colossal challenge, particularly as the workforce is expected to grow by another 
1.5 billion by the year 2025. The ILO argues for a renewed commitment by developing countries 
to the goal of employment creation, and not to treat current unemployment levels as natural 
and the inevitable outcome of market forces, as if nothing can be done. The World Bank devoted 
its 1995 and 2013 World Development Reports to the conditions of employment in developing 
countries, and it painted a sombre picture (World Bank, 1995, 2012). (See Case example 3.2.) To 
stop unemployment rising, there has to be employment growth of at least 2% per annum, which 
requires output growth of at least 4% per annum. Not many countries are able to grow this rapidly 
and consistently over time.
Case example 3.2
The importance of jobs
Jobs provide higher earnings and better benefits as countries grow, but they are also a 
driver of development. Poverty falls as people work their way out of hardship and as 
jobs empowering women lead to a greater investment in children. Efficiency increases 
as workers get better at what they do, as more productive jobs appear, and less pro-
ductive ones disappear. Societies flourish as jobs bring together people from different 
ethnic and social backgrounds and provide alternatives to conflict. Jobs are thus more 
than a byproduct of economic growth. They are transformational – they are what we 
earn, what we do, and even who we are.
High unemployment and unmet job expectations among youth are the most 
immediate concerns. But, in many developing countries, where farming and self-­
employment are prevalent and safety nets are, at best, modest, unemployment rates 
can be low. In these countries, growth is seldom jobless. Most of the poor work long 
hours but simply cannot make ends meet. And the violation of basic rights is not un-
common. Therefore, the number of jobs is not all that matters: jobs with high develop-
ment payoffs are needed.
Confronted with these challenges, policy-makers ask difficult questions:
•
• Should countries build their development strategies around growth, or should they 
focus on jobs?
•
• Can entrepreneurship be fostered, especially among the many microenterprises in 
developing countries, or are entrepreneurs born?
•
• Are greater investments in education and training a prerequisite for employability, 
or can skills be built through jobs?
•
• In times of major crises and structural shift, should jobs, not just workers, be pro-
tected?
•
• Is there a risk that policies supporting job creation in one country will be at the ex-
pense of jobs in other countries?
71
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
All this is a very aggregative analysis. The issue still to be addressed is the emergence of increas-
ing urban unemployment. The problem is not so much one of a deficiency of demand for labour 
in an aggregate demand sense. The causal factors relate to the incentives for labour to migrate 
from rural to urban areas, and the incapacity of urban areas to provide employment owing to a 
lack of other necessary factors of production to work with labour, particularly capital. As far as 
migration is concerned, there are both push and pull factors at work.
The push factors have to do with the limited job opportunities in rural areas and a greater 
desire and ability to move, fostered by education and improved communications. The pull fac-
tors relate to the development of urban industrial activities that offer jobs at a higher real wage 
than can be earned in rural areas, so that even if a migrant is unemployed for part of the year, 
they may still be better off migrating to the town than working in the rural sector. If there is no 
work at all in the rural sector, the migrant loses nothing, except friends and the security of the 
extended family system. The rate of growth of job opportunities in the rural sector depends on 
the rate of growth of demand for the output of the rural sector and the rate at which jobs are 
being ‘destroyed’ by productivity growth.
As we saw earlier, if the demand for agricultural output is growing at 1.5% and productivity is 
growing at 1%, then the growth of labour demand will be 0.5%. But if the labour force is growing 
at 2%, there will be a 1.5 percentage point gap between the supply and demand for labour. If the 
level of disguised unemployment in the rural sector does not increase, this figure constitutes the 
potential volume of migrants. If the urban labour force is one-half of the size of the rural labour 
force, a 1.5% migration of rural labour would represent a 3% increase in the urban labour force 
owing to migration.
On average, this is about the extent of the influx from the rural sector into the urban areas of 
developing countries. On top of this, there is the natural increase in the workforce in urban areas 
of 2% to consider. If job opportunities in urban areas are increasing at only 3%, then 2–3% of the 
urban labour force will be added to the amount of urban unemployment year by year, forcing 
labour into the informal service sector. In that case, unemployment shows up as poverty.
Historically, the process of development has always been associated with, and character-
ized by, an exodus from the land, continuing over centuries. The uniqueness of the present 
situation is not the migration itself, but its magnitude and speed. And the problem is that 
the urban sector cannot absorb the numbers involved. For any given technology, the rate at 
Case example 3.2
The importance of jobs – continued
The World Development Report 2013: Jobs offers answers to these and other difficult 
questions by looking at jobs as drivers of development – not as derived labour demand 
– and by considering all types of jobs – not just formal wage employment. The report 
provides a framework that cuts across sectors and shows that the best policy responses 
vary across countries, depending on their levels of development, endowments, demog-
raphy and institutions. Policy fundamentals matter in all cases, as they enable a vibrant 
private sector, the source of most jobs in the world. Labour policies can help as well, 
even if they are less critical than is often assumed. Development policies, from making 
smallholder farming viable, to fostering functional cities, to engaging in global markets, 
hold the key to success.
Source: World Bank, 2012.
72
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
which the urban (industrial) sector can absorb migrants largely depends on the rate of capital 
formation. If labour and capital must be combined in fixed proportions, and the rate of capital 
accumulation is only 3%, then the rate of increase in job opportunities can be only 3% also. 
Unfortunately, however, as will be shown in Chapter 5, the problem is not necessarily solved 
by a faster rate of capital accumulation in the urban sector, because migration is not simply 
a function of the actual difference in real remuneration between the two sectors, but also of 
the level of job opportunities in the urban sector. If the rate of job creation increases, this may 
merely increase the flow of migrants, with no reduction in unemployment. The solution would 
seem to be to create more job opportunities in the rural sector. This requires, however, not 
only the redirection of investment but also the extension of education and transport facilities, 
which, in the past few years, have themselves become powerful push factors in the migration 
process. Whereas formerly redundant labour might have remained underemployed on the fam-
ily farm, now­
adays education and easy transportation provide the incentive and the means to 
seek alternative employment opportunities. While education and improved communications 
are desirable in themselves, and facilitate development, their provision has augmented the flow 
of migrants from rural to urban areas.
The pull factors behind migration are not hard to identify. The opportunities for work and 
leisure provided by the industrial, urban environment contrast sharply with the conservatism 
and stultifying atmosphere of rural village life and naturally act as a magnet for those on low 
incomes or without work, especially the young. Given the much higher wages in the urban 
sector, even the prospect of long spells of unemployment in the towns does not detract from 
the incentive to migrate. Moreover, the choice is not necessarily between remaining in the 
rural sector and migrating to the urban sector, with the prospect of long periods of unemploy-
ment. The unemployed in the urban sector can often find work, or create work for themselves, 
on the fringes of the industrial sector – in particular in the informal service sector of the 
urban economy. The wages may be low, but some income is better than no income. In other 
words, unemployment in urban areas may take the form of underemployment, or become 
disguised, just as in the case of the rural sector – its manifestation being low income. This 
has led to the notion of an income measure of unemployment, which needs to be added to 
registered unemployment to obtain a true measure of unemployment and the availability of 
labour supply.
One way of measuring the extent of unemployment disguised in the form of low- productiv-
ity/low-income jobs is to take the difference between the actual labour employed at the sub-
standard income and the labour that would be required to produce a given level of output or 
service at an acceptable level of income per head. Before measurement can take place, of course, 
the acceptable (standard) level of income has to be defined. It could be that the level is set as the 
‘poverty line’, below which health and welfare become seriously impaired. The income measure of 
unemployment would thus be:
U 5 L 2 L* 5 O
O/L 2
O
O/L*
where L is the actual labour employed, L* is the labour consistent with an acceptable level of 
income per person employed, O/L is the actual level of productivity (or income per head), O/L* 
is the acceptable level of income per employed person, and O is output. Let us work an example. 
Suppose that the annual flow of output of an activity or service, such as haircuts, is $1 million and 
that the existing number employed is 5,000, giving a level of productivity of $200. Now suppose 
that the acceptable level of productivity to produce an acceptable level of income per person 
73
  t  5 ) &  $ ) " 3 " $ 5 & 3 * 4 5 * $ 4  0 '  6 / % & 3 % & 7 & - 0 1 . & / 5  " / %  4 5 3 6 $ 5 6 3 " -  $ ) " / ( &
employed is $500 (roughly the international poverty line of $1.90 a day). The income measure of 
unemployment is then:
U5 1,000,000
200
 2 1,000,000
500
 5 3,000
that is, over one-half of the existing labour force is disguisedly unemployed, in the sense that the 
level of output is not suﬃcient for those who currently work to maintain an adequate standard 
of living.
The above analysis of employment and unemployment trends in developing countries points 
to a number of policy implications that were also highlighted by the ILO as long ago as 1969, when 
it ﬁrst sponsored missions to several countries to undertake a detailed diagnosis of the employ-
NFOUQSPCMFN	TFFʾPSCFDLF
$FSUBJOMZBOBEFRVBUFSBUFPGPVUQVUHSPXUIJTSFRVJSFEUP
employ workers entering the labour market for the ﬁrst time and to absorb the eﬀects of product-
ivity growth, but much more is required. There is a case for the use of more labour-intensive tech-
OJRVFTPGQSPEVDUJPO	TFF$IBQUFS
BOEUIFJTTVFPGSVSBMoVSCBONJHSBUJPOOFFETUPCFUBDLMFE
by promoting more employment opportunities outside the urban centres, particularly for young 
people. Without such measures, unemployment will continue to grow, especially in urban areas. 
'FMJQFBOE)BTBO	
BUUIF"TJBO%FWFMPQNFOU#BOLBSHVFUIBUFNQMPZNFOUDSFBUJPOBOE
combating unemployment, is the major development challenge facing Asian economies today 
because unemployment is a major cause of poverty and social unrest.
One way of mitigating the eﬀects of unemployment is through public employment schemes. 
India has a national rural employment guarantee scheme, which was launched in 2006, whereby 
every rural household is guaranteed up to 100 days of unskilled manual wage employment per 
year at the statuary minimum wage for agricultural workers. If employment is not provided within 
15 days, the worker is entitled to an unemployment allowance. So far, over 5 million public works 
have been undertaken across India, providing employment to more than 50 million households, 
and over 3 billion person days of work have been generated on projects such as water conserva-
tion, rural connectivity and land development. A beneﬁcial side eﬀect of the scheme is that it 
raises productivity in agriculture and raises agricultural incomes as the demand for food rises. The 
scheme costs the Indian government about 0.6% of GDP.
In 2002, Argentina launched a programme for providing a subsistence income to unemployed 
heads of households with at least one child in return for work for a minimum of 20 hours a week 
on small projects that improve local infrastructure. About 2 million households have beneﬁted 
from the scheme, at a cost of 1% of GDP. The impact on unemployment and poverty has been 
signiﬁcant, with multiplier eﬀects on the rest of the economy estimated as 2.5 times the amount 
of initial expenditure.
There is much scope for these programmes to be adopted more widely across developing 
countries.
Inequality: vertical and horizontal
As well as the average per capita income being low in developing countries, the distribution 
of income, wealth and power is also typically very unequal, and much more unequal than in 
developed countries. All too often, the growth and development that takes place in poor coun-
tries beneﬁts the richest few, and the vast mass of the population is left untouched. Rural and 
urban poverty are still widespread, and if anything the degree of income inequality within many 
74
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
developing countries is increasing. The way income is distributed across individuals and house-
holds is referred to as vertical inequality, and is the traditional measure of inequality that devel-
opment policy focuses upon. There is also the concept, however, of horizontal inequality, which 
is concerned with how different groups in society are treated, based on race, religion, language, 
class, gender and so on. The well-being of people can be affected as much by horizontal inequality 
as by vertical inequality. First, we will consider vertical inequality and then horizontal inequality.
It should come as no surprise that the transformation of economies from a primitive subsist-
ence state into industrial societies, within a basically capitalist framework, should be accompanied 
in the early stages by widening disparities in the personal distribution of income. Some people are 
more industrious than others and more adept at accumulating wealth. Opportunities cannot, 
by the very nature of things, be equal for all. In the absence of strong redistributive taxation, 
income inequality will inevitably accompany industrialization because of the inequality of skills 
and wealth that differences in individual ability and initiative – and industrialization – produce.
The observation that income inequality increases with the level of development and then 
declines is often called the Kuznets curve, named after the famous development economist Simon 
Kuznets, who did pioneering research on structural change and income distribution in the 1950s 
and 1960s (e.g. Kuznets 1955, 1963), which earned him the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1971. 
Kuznets showed that in many of the present developed countries, the degree of inequality first 
increased and then decreased in the later stages of industrialization, giving an inverted U-shaped 
curve. For the developing countries, the pioneering work of Adelman and Morris (1971), extended 
by Paukert (1973), also showed fairly conclusively that inequality increases up to a certain stage of 
development and then declines, graphically showing an inverted U-shape similar to the work of 
Kuznets for developed countries. The greater degree of inequality in developing countries appears 
largely due to the higher share of income received by the richest 5% of income recipients – nearly 
30% of income in developing countries compared with 20% in developed countries.
Deininger and Squire (1996), of the World Bank, have surveyed 682 studies of income distribu-
tion in over 100 countries and calculated average Gini ratios for each country, together with the 
ratio of the share of income received by the top 20% of income earners (top quintile) to that of the 
bottom 20% of income earners (bottom quintile). Latin America, the Caribbean and Africa have 
by far the largest degree of income inequality, with the Gini ratio well over 50 in many countries, 
for example Brazil (57.3), Mexico (53.8) and South Africa (62.3). In contrast, income inequality in 
Asia, the Pacific region and Eastern Europe appears to be much less. In China and India, the two 
largest countries in the world measured by population, the Gini ratio is just over 30, much the 
same as for high-income countries. Generally speaking, the higher the Gini ratio, the greater the 
ratio of income shares between the top and bottom 20% of income earners. In South Africa that 
ratio is 32:1 and in Brazil 23:1.
Income inequality has been increasing in most countries since the mid-1980s, supporting the 
Kuznets curve for developing economies, but defying the Kuznets curve for developed countries. 
The exception is some Latin American countries, particularly Brazil, Mexico and Argentina, where 
inequality is still high, but declining. In China and India, inequality is increasing.
The traditional view used to be that inequality was good for growth because investment relied 
on savings from the rich. This view is now challenged because physical capital accumulation has 
become less important than human capital (education and skills) for growth, and income ine-
quality is not good for growth if those on low incomes suffer poor health, a lack of education 
 
and low productivity. Income inequality can also lead to a lack of social cohesion and dam­
aging political lobbying by rich vested interests. It has been estimated by the World Bank that 
a 5 point increase in the Gini ratio reduces growth by about 0.5% per annum (Milanovic, 2011). 
75
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
Redistributing income to reduce inequality can promote growth. Table 3.5 gives some representa-
tive figures for the Gini ratio in countries with the highest and lowest levels of inequality.
South Africa has the second highest degree of income inequality as measured by the Gini ratio. 
This is the legacy of the apartheid policy pursued in South Africa over many years, with a minority 
white population discriminating against the black and Asian majority with regard to jobs, hous-
ing, education and health. Four other African countries stand out – Central African Republic, 
Zambia, Lesotho and Rwanda. Notice also that many of the countries with the highest degree of 
inequality are located in South and Central America, but there are no countries in Asia with Gini 
ratios over 50. Countries with the lowest Gini ratios are either Scandinavian or former territories 
of the Soviet Union.
There are several formidable barriers to narrowing the income distribution gap:
1.	 There is the dualistic nature of many economies (see Chapter 10), perpetuated by feudal land 
tenure systems and urban bias in the allocation of investment resources.
2.	 There is inequality in the provision of education facilities, and a particular lack of facilities in 
rural areas where the poorest are concentrated.
3.	 There is disguised rural unemployment, underemployment and open unemployment in urban 
areas created by rural–urban migration, a shortage of investment resources and inappropriate 
production techniques.
Until development policy comes to grips with these problems, there will continue to be large 
pockets of absolute poverty and a marked degree of inequality in income distribution. When 
deciding on the allocation of investment resources and the choice of projects, a high weight must 
be given to projects that raise the income of the poorest if the income distribution is to be nar-
rowed (see Chapter 6).
Now let us turn to horizontal inequality (HI), which is concerned with how economic differ-
ences, social demarcations and political power combine to produce differences in entitlements and 
Table 3.5  The Gini ratio for high and low inequality countries, 2013
High inequality
Gini ratio
Low inequality
Gini ratio
Namibia
63.9
Sweden
25.0
South Africa
63.1
Ukraine
25.6
Haiti
59.2
Norway
25.8
Zambia
57.5
Slovakia
26.0
Bolivia
56.3
Belarus
26.5
Central African Republic
56.3
Finland
26.9
Colombia
55.9
Romania
27.4
Guatemala
55.7
Afghanistan
27.8
Brazil
54.7
Bulgaria
28.2
Lesotho
52.3
Germany
28.3
Chile
52.1
Montenegro
28.6
Paraguay
52.4
Kazakhstan
29.0
Panama
51.9
Austria
29.2
Rwanda
50.8
Serbia
29.6
Source: World Bank, 2015.
76
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
capabilities for different groups in society. Groups may be defined in a number of ways, as already 
mentioned: race, religion, gender, location, class, language and so on. Stewart (2001) develops the 
hypothesis that not only is HI responsible for much conflict within societies, but it also affects 
the development process in a number of ways. For example, some groups may be denied access 
to public goods such as education and healthcare. This impoverishes not only the group, but the 
economy at large. Certain regions may be deprived of infrastructure investment because of par-
ticular groups located in these regions, which not only damages the region but the progress of the 
whole economy. To be discriminated against on the basis of a particular group identity has psycho-
logical effects, and affects the core goals of development discussed in Chapter 1: life sustenance, 
self-esteem and freedom. Thus, HI is an important dimension of well-being, and can have eco-
nomic and political consequences highly detrimental to development. Despite this, international 
development policy is rarely focused on the narrowing of group divisions. HI would not matter 
so much if there was mobility between groups, or if individuals were free to choose which group 
they belonged to, but this is rarely the case in often highly stratified developing countries. Stewart 
(2001) gives examples of several case studies of the basis and consequences of horizontal inequality, 
for example, in Mexico, Brazil, Fiji, Malaysia and South Africa. The situation in several countries is 
given in Case example 3.3. It is clear that development policy needs to tackle horizontal inequality 
between groups, as well as vertical inequality with respect to income distribution across individuals.
Case example 3.3
Inequalities between groups can fuel conflict and tension
The root causes of violent conflict are rarely simple. But as the examples below show, 
a common theme is emerging from recent research into conflict: the role that socio-
economic and political inequalities between groups can play in causing tensions and 
violence. Less research has been done on the role that cultural exclusions of groups 
may play (such as lack of recognition of languages or religious practices), but these are 
also issues that can lead to mobilization and protests and so may also be important 
root causes or triggers of conflict.
•
• Severe rioting against the Chinese in Malaysia in the late 1960s has been attributed 
largely to the animosity felt by the politically dominant but economically sidelined 
Bumiputera majority towards the economically dominant Chinese minority.
•
• Civil war in Sri Lanka since the early 1980s has been linked to tensions resulting 
from inequalities between the Tamil minority and Sinhalese majority. Colonial ad-
ministrators had favoured the Tamil minority economically, but this advantage was 
sharply reversed once the Sinhalese gained power and increasingly sidelined the Ta-
mil minority in areas such as educational opportunities, civil service recruitment 
and language policy.
•
• In Uganda, the Bantu-speaking people (largely in the centre and south) have been 
economically dominant but politically sidelined compared with the non-Bantu- 
speaking people (largely in the north). These economic and political inequities have 
played a role in major conflicts, including the violence initiated by Idi Amin (1970s) 
and by the second Obote regime (1983–85).
•
• Indigenous people in the state of Chiapas, Mexico have long suffered political and 
socioeconomic deprivation. They have demanded greater political autonomy, im-
proved socioeconomic conditions and protection of their cultural heritage, culmin­
ating in uprisings against the Mexican state in four municipalities.
77
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
Growth and distribution
The observation that income inequality increases with the level of development and then declines 
is not to say that faster economic growth within a country necessarily worsens the income dis-
tribution. Recent international evidence suggests that rapid structural transformation and fast 
economic growth have benefited the poor as much as the rich. Nor, for that matter, is inequality 
a necessary condition for growth because it generates more saving, as it is sometimes claimed. 
Naqvi (1995) looked in detail at 40 developing countries and found that high growth rates and 
distributive justice (as well as macroeconomic stability) have tended to move together. This is also 
the conclusion of Dollar and Kraay (2000), who examined the relationship between growth and 
income distribution across 80 countries over 40 years. They found that the income of the poor 
(the bottom 20% of the population) rises one to one with overall growth, and the relation is no 
different in poor countries than in rich ones. Nor has the poverty–growth relationship changed 
much over time. In other words, growth seems to benefit the poor as much as the rich, so that rela­
tive inequality (the Gini ratio) stays the same (although absolute inequality still widens, of course, 
because the same growth of income gives more dollars to a rich person than a poor person).
On the question of whether inequality promotes growth, the answer seems to be ‘no’. If the 
Gini ratio is included in a cross-section equation to explain differences in growth between coun-
tries, the coefficient is normally negative, not positive (see Forbes, 2000). In other words, a more 
equal distribution of income is good for growth. Income equality is probably standing here as a 
proxy for such growth-inducing factors as good governance, civil society, equal property rights 
and equality of opportunity. The successful Asian ‘tiger economies’ have much more equal distri-
butions of income, and better governance, than most other developing economies.
Case example 3.3
Inequalities between groups can fuel conflict and tension – continued
•
• In South Africa before 1994, the black majority was severely disadvantaged politic­
ally and socioeconomically, which led to many uprisings between 1976 and the 
transfer of power in 1993.
•
• Catholics in Northern Ireland have suffered economic and political deprivation 
since the sixteenth century. The continuance of Northern Ireland as part of the UK in 
the 1920s ensured that Protestants would enjoy permanent political and economic 
dominance – fuelling demands by northern Catholics to become part of the pre-
dominantly Catholic Republic of Ireland. Violent conflict started in the late 1960s and 
began to ease in the 1990s following systematic efforts to reduce these inequalities.
•
• Constitutional crises and coups have occurred in Fiji, notably in 1987 and 1999, as 
economically sidelined indigenous Fijians have feared losing political control to the 
economically dominant Indian-origin Fijians.
•
• Increasing tensions between Muslims and Christians in Poso, Central Sulawesi, In-
donesia began surfacing in the mid-1990s as the Muslim community increasingly 
gained more than indigenous Christians from new economic policies.
•
• Since colonial times, the indigenous people of Guatemala have suffered political 
and economic discrimination, contributing to the country’s ongoing conflicts.
•
• The Maoist insurgency launched in Nepal in 1996 may be attributed to deep griev-
ances stemming from the systematic marginalization and exclusion of certain ethnic 
groups, castes and women.
Source: UNDP, 2004.
78
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Poverty-weighted growth rates
Whether progress is being made towards achieving the twin objectives of faster growth and a 
more equal distribution of income can be examined simultaneously by constructing poverty-
weighted indices of growth.
GNP growth as conventionally measured is a weighted average of the growth of income of 
different groups of people, where the relevant weights are each group’s share of total income. The 
measured growth rate pays no regard to the distribution of income. A high growth rate may be 
recorded, but this may have benefited only the rich. For example, suppose the bottom third of 
the population receive 10% of income, the middle third receive 30% of income, and the top third 
receive 60% of income. GNP growth would be measured as:
% growth of GNP 5 r1(0.1) 1 r2(0.3) 1 r3(0.6),
where r1, r2 and r3 are the respective rates of growth of income of the three groups. Suppose 
 
r1 5 1%, r2 5 1% and r3 5 10%. A GNP growth rate of 6.4% would then be recorded, which looks 
very respectable but the position of the poorest will hardly have changed.
The idea of constructing poverty-weighted indices of growth is to give at least equal weight to 
all income groups in society, if not a higher weight to the poor, in order to obtain a better measure 
of the growth of overall welfare combining the growth of income with its distribution.
In the above example, for instance, if each group is given an equal weight of one-third, the 
measured growth of welfare becomes:
% growth of ‘welfare’ 5 1(0.33) 1 1(0.33) 1 10(0.33) 5 4%
which is much less than the rate of growth shown by the conventional measure of GNP growth 
when distributional considerations are taken into account.
A society could go further and say that it places no value or weight on income growth for the 
richest third of the population, and places all the weight on the lower income groups with, say, 
a 60% weight to the bottom third and a 40% weight to the middle third. The growth of ‘welfare’ 
would then look derisory:
% growth of ‘welfare’ 5 1(0.6) 1 1(0.4) 1 10(0) 5 1%
This approach has been experimented with by economists from the World Bank (see Ahluwalia 
et al., 1979) to compare countries, giving a 60% weight to the lowest 40% of the population, a 
40% weight to the middle 40% and no weight to the top 20%. In countries where the distribu-
tion of income had deteriorated, the poverty-weighted measure of the growth of welfare showed 
less improvement than GNP growth, and where the distribution of income had improved, the 
poverty-weighted growth rate showed more improvement than GNP growth.
Stages of development and structural change
It is often argued that countries pass through certain phases during the course of development 
and that by identifying the particular characteristics of these phases, a country can be deemed to 
have reached a certain stage of development. The simplest stage theory is the sector thesis of Fisher 
(1939) and Clark (1940), who employed the distinction between primary, secondary and tertiary 
production as a basis of a theory of development. Countries are assumed to start as primary 
producers and then, as the basic necessities of life are met, resources shift into ­
manufacturing or 
79
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
secondary activities. Finally, with rising income, more leisure and an increasingly saturated market 
for manufactured goods, resources move into service or tertiary activities producing ‘commod­
ities’ with a high income elasticity of demand.
Naturally enough in this schema, less developed countries are identified with primary produc-
tion, more developed countries with the production of manufactured goods, and mature devel-
oped economies have a high percentage of their resources in the service sector.
There can be no dispute that resource shifts are an integral part of the development process, 
and that one of the main determinants of these shifts is a difference in the income elasticity of 
demand for commodities and changes in their elasticity as development proceeds. But just as 
care must be taken to equate (without qualification) development and welfare with the level of 
per capita income, caution must also be exercised in identifying different degrees of underdevel-
opment, industrialization and maturity, with some fairly rigid proportion of resources engaged in 
different types of activity. Such an association would ignore the doctrine of comparative advan-
tage, which holds that countries will specialize in the production of those commodities in which 
they have a relative cost advantage, as determined by natural or acquired resource endowments. 
The fact that one country produces predominantly primary products while another produces 
mainly manufactured goods need not imply that they are at different stages of development, 
particularly if productivity in the primary sector matches productivity in the industrial sector. 
Such an association would also ignore the different types of service activities that may exist at 
different stages of a country’s history. There are three broad categories of service activities. Newer 
service activities linked with the growth of leisure and high mass consumption tend to have a 
high income elasticity of demand; services linked to the growth of manufacturing also grow, but 
at a declining rate; and traditional services of pre-industrial times, such as domestic servants, 
decline. In short, tertiary production is an aggregation of many dissimilar service activities, some 
of which are related to low per capita incomes and some to high per capita incomes. Thus, the 
same proportion of total resources devoted to services may be associated with very different 
levels of development.
Having said all this, however, the fact remains that there is a good deal of empirical support for 
the Fisher–Clark view that the pattern of development across countries evidences many common 
characteristics, especially the shift of resources from agriculture to industry.
Figure 3.3 plots the relation between the level of per capita income and the share of employ-
ment in agriculture, industry and services across 69 countries using simple regression analysis. The 
broad thesis of Fisher and Clark is confirmed. On average, in low-income countries, the share of 
employment in agriculture is approximately 40% (and much higher in the very poorest countries 
of Africa), while only 15% is employed in industry. By contrast, in high-income countries, less 
than 5% is employed in agriculture and nearly 30% in industry. The proportion of the labour force 
employed in services rises inexorably, but the nature of the service activities is different – petty 
services in low-income countries and sophisticated services in the high-income countries.
What is true of the sectoral distribution of the labour force is also true of the sectoral distri-
bution of output, although the magnitude of the proportions differ in lower income countries 
because productivity differs between sectors. Figure 3.4 shows the sectoral distribution of output 
across 141 countries also by regressing the shares on per capita income. In low-income countries, 
on average, the share of agriculture in total GDP is 30% compared with an employment share of 
over 40%, because productivity is lower in agriculture than in industry. Industry’s share of output 
in poor countries is 20% compared with an employment share of 15%. The share of output and 
employment in services is roughly equal.
80
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
90%
Services
Agriculture
Industry
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
233
584
786
962
1,039
1,181
1,106
1,589
2,107
2,166
2,396
2,494
3,425
3,892
4,403
4,505
4,733
3,966
5,719
6,163
6,548
8,094
11,093
13,240
16,054
23,031
23,799
25,301
25,968
27,033
30,124
31,597
35,960
38,962
51,950
Figure 3.3  The distribution of the labour force (%)
Source: Data from the World Bank, 2009 and the ILO, 2009 for 69 countries.
Source: Data from the World Bank, 2009 and the ILO, 2009 for 141 countries.
Services
Agriculture
Industry
233
253
284
321
400
428
524
588
942
1,007
1,117
1,257
1,451
1,589
1,871
2,104
2,199
2,396
2,494
3,425
4,221
4,403
4,630
5,047
5,719
6,548
8,143
9,864
15,688
23,031
24,997
25,968
30,124
35,960
100
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
51,590
Figure 3.4  The distribution of output (%)
Notice also that while the share of agriculture falls continually, and the share of services increases 
continually, the share of employment and output in industry first rises and then falls as countries 
get richer. The latter is referred to as the process of deindustrialization. This process started in 
developed countries many years ago (see Rowthorn and Ramswamy, 1999), but is now begin-
ning to hit middle-income (and even some low-income) countries (see Pieper, 2003; Tregenna, 
2009). The level of per capita income at which the share of industry peaks seems to be falling; 
a phenomenon referred to as ‘premature deindustrialization’ or ‘premature non-­
industrialization’ 
(Rodrik, 2016). Some African and Latin American countries seem to be deindustrializing before 
they have ever been properly industrialized. This is worrying in an open economy where export 
growth is highly correlated with the growth of manufacturing output (see Pacheco-López and 
81
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
Thirlwall, 2014). One explanation is that poor countries lack the capabilities and infrastructure 
 
to compete in the global marketplace for industrial goods, particularly with freer trade and 
the free movement of labour and capital. Manufacturers seek locations where wage costs per 
unit of output (the efficiency wage) are lowest, which are not necessarily the poorest coun-
tries. Another explanation would be that the world is becoming more and more saturated with 
 
manufactured goods, and there is a continued shift in the purchase of, and trade in, service activ­
ities. India has responded to this shift to the neglect of its industrial base. Pakistan, Sri Lanka and 
Nepal are imitating India and, to a large extent, skipping the stage of industrialization. If countries 
can acquire an early comparative advantage in tradable service activities, their exports may not 
suffer, but other countries are likely to get left behind. Also, many service activities, particularly in 
the information technology sector, require skilled labour, and are increasingly automated, which 
presents an enormous employment challenge as the labour force continues to grow. Only in East 
Asia and the Pacific region is the importance of industry increasing.
Table 3.6 gives a summary of output shares of GDP by activity in the different regions of the 
world. The shares of agriculture can be seen to go down the richer the countries, and the share of 
services to rise. The share of manufacturing starts very low in low-income countries and reaches 
a peak in the upper middle-income countries, and then falls again. Notice the very small share of 
manufacturing output in sub-Saharan Africa.
As already mentioned, the changing structure of output and employment is a function of the 
different income elasticities of demand for different products. It is possible to make estimates of 
the income elasticity of demand for different commodities by using an estimating equation of 
the form: log V 5 log a 1 b log Y, where V is value-added (or output) per capita for good X, Y 
is per capita income and b is the income elasticity of demand for good X. An income elasticity 
less than unity would imply that the share of the good in total output declines as income grows. 
Conversely, an income elasticity greater than unity means that the good’s relative importance 
in total output will increase. To estimate the income elasticities, the equation is applied to data 
Table 3.6  The shares of output in GDP by region
Agriculture
Industry
Services
% of GDP
Total % of GDP
Manufacturing 
% of GDP
% of GDP
World
  3
26
16
71
Low income
32
22
  9
47
Middle income
10
35
22
56
Lower middle income
17
31
17
52
Upper middle income
10
36
24
57
Low and middle income
10
34
22
55
East Asia and Pacific
10
42
32
48
Europe and Central Asia
  8
28
16
63
Latin America and Caribbean
  5
30
14
65
Middle East and North Africa
11
37
14
52
South Asia
18
29
17
53
Sub-Saharan Africa
15
27
11
58
High income
  2
25
15
74
Source: World Bank, 2015, Table 4.2.
82
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
across countries at different stages of development. When this is done, the income elasticity for 
agricultural products is typically estimated at about 0.5, while the income elasticity for services 
is significantly above unity. The income elasticity for industries is nonlinear. Up to a certain level 
of income, the elasticity is above unity, and then it falls below unity (consistent with the share of 
industrial output first rising and then falling).2
Within the industrial sector, there are also differences in the income elasticity of demand for 
products, which cause the pattern of industry to change as development proceeds. The most 
notable demand shift is the relative switch from basic necessities and low value-added goods to 
high value-added consumer durables.
Rostow’s stages of growth
Interest in stage theories of development was given a major impetus with the publication of 
Rostow’s The Stages of Economic Growth (1960), which represents an attempt to provide an alter-
native to the Marxist interpretation of history – hence its subtitle, A Non-Communist Manifesto. 
Rostow presents a political theory as well as a descriptive economic study of the pattern of the 
growth and development of nations.
Walt Rostow
Born 1916, New York, USA. Died 2003. Professor of Economic History, 
MIT (1950–61) and, after US government service in the 1960s during the 
Kennedy and Johnson administrations, Emeritus Professor of Political 
Economy, University of Texas, Austin. Famous for his bestselling, but 
controversial book The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist 
Manifesto (1960), in which he identifies several necessary conditions for 
countries to take off into self-sustaining growth: important among them 
an agricultural revolution, an investment ratio at least 10% of GDP, and an 
institutional environment conducive to entrepreneurship.
The essence of Rostow’s thesis is that it is logically and practically possible to identify stages of 
development and to classify societies according to those stages. He distinguishes five such stages: 
traditional, transitional, take-off, maturity and high mass consumption.
All we need say about traditional societies is that, for Rostow, the whole of the pre-­
Newtonian 
world consisted of such societies; for example, the dynasties of China, the civilizations of the 
Middle East, the Mediterranean and medieval Europe and so on. Traditional societies are charac-
terized by a ceiling on productivity imposed by the limitations of science. Traditional soci­
eties are 
thus recognizable by a very high proportion of the workforce in subsistence agriculture, coupled 
with very little mobility or social change, great divisions of wealth and decentralized political 
power. Today, few societies could be classed as traditional, except perhaps some of the primitive 
tribes of Amazonia or Papua New Guinea. Most societies emerged from the traditional stage some 
time ago, mainly under the impact of external challenge or the rise of nationalism. The exceptions 
to the pattern of emergence from the traditional state are those countries that Rostow describes 
83
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
as having been ‘born free’, such as the USA and certain British dominions. Here, the preconditions 
of ‘take-off’ were laid in a more simple fashion by the construction of ‘social overhead capital’ 
(growth-promoting institutions) and the introduction of industry from abroad. But, for the rest 
of the world, change was much more basic and fundamental, consisting not only of economic 
transformation but also a political and social transition from feudalism.
The stage between feudalism and take-off Rostow calls the transitional stage. The main eco-
nomic requirement in the transition phase is that the level of investment should rise to at least 
10% of national income to ensure self-sustaining growth. The main direction of investment must 
be in transport and other social overhead capital to build up society’s infrastructure. The precon-
ditions for a rise in the investment ratio consist of the willingness of people to lend risk capital, the 
availability of entrepreneurs, and the willingness of society at large to operate an economic system 
geared to the factory and the principle of the division of labour. But a country shifting resources 
out of agriculture needs to feed itself, so an agricultural revolution is also necessary.
On the social front, a new elite must emerge to fabricate the industrial society, and it must 
supersede in authority the land-based elite of the traditional society. Surpluses must be chan-
nelled by the new elite from agriculture to industry, and there must be a willingness to take risks 
and to respond to economic incentives. And because of the enormity of the task of transition, 
the establishment of an effective modern government is vital. The length of the transition phase 
depends on the speed with which local talent, energy and resources are devoted to moderniza-
tion and the overthrow of the established order. In this respect, political leadership has an import­
ant part to play.
Then there is the take-off stage. The characteristics of take-off are sometimes difficult to dis-
tinguish from the characteristics of the transition stage, and this has been a point of contention 
between Rostow and his critics. Nonetheless, let us describe the take-off stage as Rostow sees 
it – a ‘stage’ to which reference is constantly made in the development literature. Since the pre-
conditions of take-off have been met in the transitional stage, the take-off stage is a short stage 
of development, during which economic growth becomes self-sustaining. Investment must rise 
to a level in excess of 10% of national income in order for per capita income to rise sufficiently to 
guarantee adequate future levels of saving and investment. Also important is the establishment 
of what Rostow calls ‘leading growth sectors’. Historically, domestic finance for take-off seems 
to have come from two main sources. The first was from a diversion of part of the product of 
agriculture by land reform and other means. The examples of Tsarist Russia and Meiji Japan are 
quoted, where government bonds were substituted for the landowner’s claim to the flow of rent 
payments. A second source was from enterprising landlords voluntarily ploughing back rents into 
commerce and industry.
In practice, the development of major export industries has sometimes led to take-off permit-
ting substantial capital imports. Grain in the USA, Russia and Canada, timber in Sweden and, to a 
lesser extent, textiles in Britain are cited as examples. Countries such as the USA, Russia, Sweden 
and Canada also benefited during take-off from substantial inflows of foreign capital. The sector 
or sectors that gave rise to the take-off seem to have varied from country to country, but in many 
countries railway building seems to have been prominent. Certainly, improvement of the internal 
means of communication is crucial for an expansion of markets and to facilitate exports, apart from 
any direct impact on industries such as coal, steel and engineering. But Rostow argues that any 
industry can play the role of leading sector in the take-off stage, provided four conditions are met:
1.	 The market for the product is expanding rapidly to provide a firm basis for the growth of output.
2.	 The leading sector generates secondary expansion.
84
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
3.	 The sector has an adequate and continual supply of capital from ploughed-back profits.
4.	 New techniques of production can be continually introduced into the sector, leading to 
 
increased productivity.
Rostow contends that the beginnings of take-off in most countries can be traced to a particular 
stimulus. Historically, this has taken many different forms, such as a technological innovation or, 
more commonly, political revolution, for example Germany in 1848, the Meiji Restoration in Japan 
in 1868, China in 1949 and Indian independence in 1947. Rostow stresses, however, that there is 
no one single pattern or sequence of take-off. Thus, there is no need for the developing countries 
today to repeat the course of events in, say, Britain, Russia or America. The crucial requirement 
is that the preconditions for take-off are met, otherwise take-off, whatever form it takes, will be 
abortive. Investment must rise to over 10% of national income; one or more leading sectors must 
emerge; and there must exist or emerge a political, social and institutional framework that exploits 
the impulse to expand. The examples are given of the extensive railway building in Argentina 
before 1914, and in India, China and Canada before 1895, which failed to initiate take-off because 
the full transition from a traditional society had not been made. The dates of take-off for some of 
the present developed countries are given as follows: Britain 1783–1802; France 1840–60; the USA 
1843–60; Germany 1850–73; Sweden 1868–90; Japan 1878–1900; and Russia 1890–1914.
Then there is the maturity stage, which Rostow defines as the period when society has effect­
ively applied the range of modern technology to the bulk of its resources. During the period of 
maturity, new leading sectors replace the old. By this criterion, Rostow sees the development of 
the steel industry as one of the symbols of maturity. In this respect, the USA, Germany, France and 
Britain entered the stage of maturity roughly together.
Accompanying changes in the industrial structure will be structural changes in society, such 
as changes in the distribution of the workforce, the growth of an urban population, an increase in 
the proportion of white-collar workers, and a switch in industrial leadership from entrepreneur 
to manager.
Maturity also has important political features. This is the period when nations grow confident 
and exert themselves – witness Germany under Bismarck and Russia under Stalin. This is also the 
period when fundamental political choices have to be made by society on the use to which the 
greater wealth should be put. Should it be devoted to high mass consumption, the building of a 
welfare state, or imperialist ends? The balance between these possibilities has varied over time 
within countries, and between countries. Eventually, however, every nation will reach the stage 
of high mass consumption whatever the balance of choices at the stage of maturity. Since there 
is no likelihood of developing countries reaching this stage in the foreseeable future, and only a 
handful of rich countries have reached it already, we shall ignore this fifth stage here.
Instead, let us evaluate Rostow’s thesis and consider the usefulness of this type of stage theory, 
apart from its use in providing a valuable description of the development process and pinpoint-
ing some of the key growth variables. Most criticisms have hinged on whether a valid and oper­
ationally meaningful distinction can be made between stages of development, especially between 
the so-called transitional stage and take-off, and between take-off and maturity. Critics have 
attempted to argue that the characteristics that Rostow distinguishes for his different stages are 
not unique to those stages. Thus, the demarcation between take-off and transition is blurred 
because the changes that take place in the transition stage also seem to take place in the take-off 
phase, and similarly with the demarcation between take-off and maturity.
Despite these points of criticism, Rostow’s stage theory still offers valuable insights into the devel-
opment process. While the concept of a stage may be quibbled with, and stage theory dismissed 
85
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
as a blueprint for development, there are certain features of the development process that do fol-
low a well-ordered sequence. Moreover, there are certain development prerequisites that countries 
neglect at their peril. The importance of agriculture in the early stages of development cannot be 
overemphasized, together with the provision of infrastructure and political stability, if the precon-
ditions for take-off into self-sustaining growth are to be met. The role of investment is also high-
lighted: investment must reach a certain ratio of GDP (at least 10%) if per capita income growth 
is to be positive. Finally, there is the transition from the rural to the industrial society, with growth 
based on the development of leading sectors and foreign trade, which propels a society from take-
off to the stage of maturity and eventually high mass consumption. The process of industrialization 
is crucial.
Diversification
Another feature of structural change is that, as well as resource shifts from agriculture to industry 
and services, the structure of production tends to become more diversified as countries develop, 
at least up to a fairly high level of per capita income – after which there is evidence that it becomes 
more specialized again. This is well documented in the work of Imbs and Wacziarg (2003) on ‘stages 
of diversification’ (see also Felipe, 2009). They take several different measures of industrial concen-
tration (including the Gini ratio) and, using ILO and the UN Industrial Development Organization 
(UNIDO) data, show how the concentration of employment and value-added tends to fall as 
countries get richer up to about $9,000 per head (at 2000 prices) and then increases, giving a 
U-shaped curve. Obvious explanations for this pattern are that people’s preferences widen as they 
get richer, and there are more risk-takers willing to undertake new investments, which increases 
diversification. But at later stages of development, international trade increases the degree of spe-
cialization due to agglomeration benefits (increasing returns) and falling transport costs.
Industrialization and growth
From a global perspective, there seems to be a close association across countries between living 
standards and the share of resources devoted to industrial activities, at least up to a certain point. 
In very poor countries there is virtually no industrial activity at all, while middle- and high-income 
countries devote 20–40% of resources to industry. Only three countries in the world have become 
rich on agriculture alone: Australia, New Zealand and Canada. In all other countries, living stand-
ards have risen rapidly only as resources have shifted out of agriculture into industry and sophis-
ticated services (see Szirmai, 2012).
Furthermore, research (see, for example, Szirmai et al., 2013; Thirlwall, 1983; Hansen and Zang, 
1996; Guo et al., 2012; Wells and Thirlwall, 2003; Libanio, 2006; Necmi, 1999) also shows a close 
association across countries between the growth of industry and the growth of GDP; or more 
precisely, GDP growth is faster, the greater the excess of industrial growth relative to GDP growth; 
that is, when the share of industry in total GDP is rising the fastest. Figure 3.5 shows this relation-
ship across 131 developing countries over the period 2000–14, with GDP growth measured on the 
vertical axis and the growth of industry on the horizontal axis. The scatter points represent the 
individual country observations. A line through the points with a slope less than unity shows that 
the greater the excess of industrial growth over GDP growth, the faster GDP growth seems to be. 
The point where this line cuts the 45° line gives the average growth rate that divides countries 
86
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
into those where the share of industry is falling and are growing slowly, and those where the share 
of industry is rising and are growing fast. A linear equation fitted to the scatter points in Figure 3.5 
gives the following regression result:
g 5 2.529 1 0.394x	
r2 5 0.507
The equation says that a country with industrial growth one percentage point above the average 
for all countries will have GDP growth of 0.394 percentage points above the average; and the point 
where the regression line cuts the 45° line is approximately 4.5%.3 This rate of industry growth 
separates the slow-growing countries from the faster-growing countries.
The structural thesis of the role of manufacturing is supported by the research of Szirmai 
and Verspagen (2015), who take a panel of 88 countries over the period 1950–2005 and regress 
the growth of per capita income on the share of manufacturing output and services in total 
GDP. Their results support the hypothesis of ‘manufacturing as the engine of growth’. A 10 
percentage point rise in the share of manufacturing is associated with a 0.5 percentage point 
increase in the growth of per capita income. The impact has got weaker over time, however, as 
countries have got richer; the impact is stronger in low-income countries than in high-income 
countries. The significance of the service sector for growth is much weaker, but increases in 
high-income countries.
The question is: What is special about industry, and particularly manufacturing industry, 
which accounts for these empirical associations, and which makes industry ‘the engine of 
growth’? Since differences in the growth of GDP are largely accounted for by differences in the 
rate of growth of labour productivity, there must be an association between the growth of 
industry and the growth of labour productivity. This is to be expected for two main reasons. 
First, if there are increasing returns to scale in industry, both static and dynamic, a relation is 
to be expected between the growth of industrial output and the growth of labour productiv-
ity in industry. Static economies of scale refer to the economies of large-scale production 
whereby the mass production of commodities allows them to be produced at a lower aver-
age cost. Dynamic economies of scale refer to the induced effect that output growth has 
on capital accumulation and the embodiment of new technical progress in capital. Labour 
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
–2.0
–4.0
5.0
Industrial growth (x)
GDP growth (g)
10.0
25.0
 15.0 
20.0
–10.0
–5.0
Figure 3.5  Association between growth of industry and growth of GDP
87
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
Case example 3.4
Structural change as the driver of growth: China, South Korea 
and Indonesia compared
Structural change – as the transition from low-productivity activities with low value-
added, such as agriculture and garment production, to high-productivity activities 
that can absorb surplus labour, generate higher profits and wages, and are most closely 
associated with technological development and innovation, such as manufacturing – 
promotes economic growth. The speed at which such a transition takes place also has 
an impact on the rate of economic growth. Countries that quickly climb the ladder 
towards more technologically advanced economic activities grow more rapidly and are 
more successful at lifting people out of poverty.
The remarkable economic growth of China and Southeast Asia, for example, is linked 
to the decline in the significance of the traditional agricultural sector, and rapid expan-
sion of the industrial sector and subsequent higher value-added. When the programme 
of economic reforms was initiated in China in 1978, 70% of the total labour force was 
engaged in primary sector activity. This figure declined to 38% in 2009, while the share of 
the labour force in industry rose from 17% to 28%. Today, China is an economic power-
house, on account of its profound and planned structural change, spurred by economic 
reforms, liberalized foreign trade, and high domestic and foreign investment in industry.
Structural change analysis is a powerful tool with which to compare and contrast 
the development experience of different countries. Looking at how much and how 
fast countries have diversified their structure as they climbed the stairway of devel-
opment can reveal useful insights into the sustainability of their growth strategies. 
 
A comparison of the development experience of South Korea and Indonesia illustrates 
this point. Comparing the two countries from the same starting point when their per 
capita incomes were equivalent, structural change has been much more rapid in South 
Korea than in Indonesia. As a result, South Korea has become one of the fastest grow-
ing manufacturing economies of the world. In Indonesia, by contrast, no profound 
structural change took place, resulting in much slower growth of the economy.
There is widespread agreement by development economists that structural change 
is necessary for economic growth, and that the state – and not market forces alone – 
has a role to play. It is also argued that the government should not attempt to modify 
the structures of the current economy too quickly or too drastically. Yet, how closely a 
government’s industrial policies should conform to the country’s current comparative 
advantage, or to what extent a country’s industrial structure should deviate from it, 
continue to be debated.
Source: UNIDO, 2012.
productivity also increases as output grows through learning by doing. Second, if activities 
outside industry, such as agriculture and petty services, are subject to diminishing returns, 
with the marginal product of labour less than the average product, then if resources are drawn 
from these activities into industry as industry expands, the average product of labour will rise 
in non-industrial activities. Case example 3.4 illustrates the role of structural change. These 
relationships between industrial growth, productivity growth and GDP growth are known 
in the growth and development literature as Kaldor’s growth laws, named after the well-
known Cambridge economist (Lord) Nicholas Kaldor, who first enunciated them in the 1960s 
(Kaldor, 1966, 1967).
88
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Kaldor’s growth laws
There are three basic laws that have been widely tested in developed and developing countries 
using cross-section data (that is, across countries), time-series data, and panel data combining 
time-series and cross-section data.
The first law is that there exists a strong positive correlation between the growth of manufac-
turing output (gm) and the growth of GDP (gGDP), that is:
gGDP 5 f1 (gm)      fr
1.0
(3.3)
where f1 is the functional relationship that is hypothesized to be positive.
The second law is that there exists a strong positive correlation between the growth of manu-
facturing output and the growth of productivity in manufacturing (pm), that is:
pm 5 f2(gm)      fr
2 . 0
(3.4)
where f2 is the functional relationship that is assumed to be positive. This law is also known as 
Verdoorn’s law after the Dutch economist P.J. Verdoorn, who, in the 1940s, first discovered such a 
relationship across a sample of European countries.
The third law is that there exists a strong positive relationship between the growth of manu-
facturing output and the growth of productivity outside manufacturing (pnm), that is:
pnm 5 f3 (gm)      fr
3 .0
(3.5)
where f3 is the functional relationship that is assumed to be positive.
The most rigorous test of these laws is to take a cross-section of countries, or a cross-
section of regions within a country, and to perform correlation and regression analyses for 
each equation. We will illustrate this with reference to an interesting study that applies the 
model across 28 regions of China, taking average data for the period 1965–91 (Hansen and 
Zhang, 1996). See Case example 3.5 below for an application of the model to the countries 
of Africa.
Case example 3.5
Testing Kaldor’s growth laws across African countries
One of the striking features about Africa since the 1980s is that there has been virtually 
no structural change. This is undoubtedly one of the explanations for its poor growth 
performance. Over the period 1980–96, the average growth of GDP was 2.09% per an-
num. The growth of manufacturing output was 2.11%, and the growth of agricultural 
and service output were both 2.07%. On the other hand, some African countries grew 
faster than others (e.g. Uganda, Botswana, Mauritius, Equatorial Guinea, Swaziland and 
Cape Verde grew particularly fast). To what extent can this differential growth perform­
ance be explained by the differential performance of manufacturing industries?
Regressing GDP growth against the excess of manufacturing growth (gm) over non-
manufacturing growth (gnm) across 45 countries (the side test of Kaldor’s first law) gives:
gGDP 5 0.021 1 0.408 (gm 2 gnm) 	 	
r2 5 0.188
This suggests that a country with excess growth of manufacturing of 1 percentage point 
has experienced a GDP growth rate of 0.41 percentage point above average.
89
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
Fitting equation (3.3) to the Chinese regional data gives the following regression result:
gGDP 5 1.79 1 0.56 (gm) 	
r2 5 0.67
The r2 measures the correlation between the two variables, so this equation says that 67% of the 
difference in the growth rate of output between the 28 regions in China can be accounted for by 
variation in the growth of manufacturing output between regions. This is a high degree of explana-
tory power. The regression coefficient of 0.56 says that a region with manufacturing output growth 
of 1% above the average for all regions will grow 0.56% above the average for all regions.
But before the equation can be used to support the hypothesis of manufacturing industry as the 
engine of growth, some words of warning are in order. If manufacturing output is a large fraction of total 
output, the correlation will, to a certain extent, be spurious because the same variable appears on both 
sides of the equation. There are ways to overcome this problem, however. One is to regress the growth 
of output on the difference between manufacturing and non-manufacturing output growth. The other 
is to regress non-manufacturing output growth on manufacturing output growth. Also, for manufac-
turing industry to be regarded as special, it needs to be shown that there is no significant relationship 
between total output growth and the growth of other major sectors, such as agriculture or services.4
Turning to the second law, fitting equation (3.4) to the regional data for China gave the fol-
lowing result:
pm 5 20.009 1 0.71 gm	
r2 5 0.73
We see again that the correlation is very high, with 73% of the difference in the growth of labour 
productivity between regions accounted for by differences in the growth of output itself. On 
average, a 1% difference in the growth rate of output induces a 0.71 percentage point difference in 
the growth of labour productivity. This coefficient is referred to as the Verdoorn coefficient. The 
coefficient here is higher than typically found in developed countries, which is normally about 0.5, 
but this may reflect the large economies of scale to be reaped in the early stages of development. 
Again, for manufacturing industry to be regarded as special, this second law (or Verdoorn’s law) 
should be weaker for other activities, which it will be in the absence of scale economies.
Case example 3.5
Testing Kaldor’s growth laws across African countries – continued
When GDP growth is regressed against the excess of agricultural growth over non­
agricultural growth, there is a strong negative correlation.
Estimating Kaldor’s second law gives a Verdoorn coefficient of 0.878, which suggests 
substantial increasing returns in industry.
Estimating Kaldor’s third law gives:
pT 5 0.020 1 0.524 (gi) 2 1.606 (eni) 	
r2 5 0.712
This shows that overall productivity growth (pT) across African countries is posi-
tively related to the growth of industry (gi), but negatively related to the growth of 
employment outside industry (eni).
These results support Kaldor’s structural thesis that there is something special 
about industrial activity that makes it the ‘engine of growth’.
Source: Wells and Thirlwall, 2003.
90
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The third law is difficult to test directly because it is not easy to measure productivity growth 
in many activities outside manufacturing, particularly service activities where output can only be 
measured by inputs; for example, public services such as teaching, health, defence, the civil service 
and so on. It can be tested indirectly, however, by taking overall productivity growth (pGDP) as the 
dependent variable to be explained and linking this to employment change in non-­
manufacturing 
activities (enm), holding constant the effect of output growth in manufacturing (gm). The equation 
to be estimated is thus:
pGDP 5 a3 1 b3 (gm) 1 c3 (enm)
(3.6)
with the expectation that c3 , 0.
Fitting equation (3.6) across the Chinese regions gives:
pGDP 5 0.02 1 0.49 gm 2 0.82 (enm) 	
r2 5 0.70
The coefficient on enm is significantly negative so that the slower employment growth outside 
manufacturing industry, the faster overall productivity grows. This study of China is supported by 
the work of Guo et al. (2012), who conclude: ‘[our] study validates Kaldor’s laws in the regional 
economies of China … the strong emphasis on the manufacturing sector has now proven to accel-
erate the growth of GDP and living standards in regions where the sector is concentrated’.
Kaldor’s first and second laws have recently been confirmed in two major studies of a cross-
section of 63 middle- and high-income countries over the period 1990–2013 (Marconi et. al., 
2016), and a panel of 29 developing countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America over the period 
1975–2005 (Di Meglio et al., 2015). In the former study, the relationship between manufactur-
ing growth, productivity growth and GDP growth is particularly strong in middle-income coun-
tries, which include the newly industrializing countries of Southeast Asia. The study also confirms 
the importance of manufacturing exports in driving manufacturing growth and economies as a 
whole (see also Pacheco-López and Thirlwall, 2014). The latter study also finds that some service 
sectors, such as business services with their use of knowledge and technology, may also act as an 
engine of growth where industrialization is faltering, particularly in some Asian countries.
The complete Kaldor model of the relationship between industrial growth and the develop-
ment process also contains a number of subsidiary propositions. First, as the scope for absorbing 
labour from diminishing returns activities dries up, the overall growth of GDP will slow down. The 
successful newly industrializing countries in Southeast Asia will not go on growing at close to 8% 
per annum forever. Second, there is the question of what determines the rate at which industry 
grows in the first place. In the early stages of development, it must be demand coming from the 
agricultural sector because this is what dominates the economy. In the later stages of develop-
ment, however, it is export demand that drives the system. The internal market is often too small 
to reap economies of scale, and selling to the home market does not provide the foreign exchange 
to pay for necessary imported inputs. The most successful developing countries are those that 
have geared themselves to export markets. The third proposition is that the fast growth of exports 
and output can set up a virtuous circle of growth that other countries will find difficult to break 
into without exceptional enterprise or protection. This can lead to polarization between coun-
tries, which is the essential feature of the centre–periphery models of growth and development, 
which will be discussed in Chapter 10.
Finally, there is the big policy question of how developing countries bring about structural 
change in favour of industrial activities if growth and development are to be accelerated. Should 
everything be left to market forces, or is there a role for government? The late Cambridge 
 
91
3  •  T H E  C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  S T R U C T U R A L  C H A N G E
development economist Ajit Singh tells the story of when he first went to Cambridge University 
as a student of Kaldor in the 1960s, Kaldor taught him three things: first, developing countries 
must industrialize; second, they can industrialize only by protection; and third, anyone who says 
otherwise is being dishonest. It is indeed worth remembering that none of today’s developed 
countries developed on the basis of free trade. All countries protected and promoted their infant 
industries in one way or another (see Chang, 2002; Reinert, 2007). And it is a myth, of course, that 
the highly successful countries of Southeast Asia have developed on the basis of minimalist state 
intervention and simply allowed markets to work freely (Wade, 1990). In Japan, South Korea, 
Singapore and other ‘Asian tigers’, there has been heavy state involvement in the promotion of 
industry, often working through the banking system. The issue is not whether to protect, but how 
to protect and promote industry while preserving efficiency and international competitiveness. 
These are issues that will be addressed when we turn to the topic of trade and development in 
Chapter 15.
Summary
•
• Poverty and underdevelopment of poor countries are associated with many characteristics that 
combine to keep labour productivity low.
•
• The economic structure of poor countries tends to be dominated by low-productivity agricul-
ture and petty service activities. Still over 50% of the labour force in many poor countries live 
and work in the rural sector where value-added per head is barely US$2 a day.
•
• Levels of saving and investment are low in poor countries because poor people naturally lack 
the capacity to save, and investment can be risky.
•
• Poor countries tend to have higher rates of population growth than rich countries and while 
this can confer some benefits, it can cause major difficulties by depressing saving, putting pres-
sure on food supplies and the environment, and adding to unemployment.
•
• Some poor countries suffer the ‘curse of natural resources’. Mineral and oil production can lead 
to corruption and rent-seeking behaviour and keep the exchange rate high, making the produc-
tion and export of other goods uncompetitive.
•
• Unemployment is high in poor countries because there are limited employment opportunities 
on the land, and the growth of alternative employment opportunities is constrained by a lack 
of investment. Rural–urban migration exacerbates unemployment in the cities.
•
• The distribution of income tends to be more unequal in poor countries than rich, and also in 
power relations between sections of society. There is very often discrimination on the grounds 
of gender, religion, race and ethnic origin.
•
• Countries pass through stages of development – what Rostow describes as traditional, tran-
sitional, take-off, maturity, and high mass consumption. Many poor countries are still in the 
transitional or early take-off stages. Certain preconditions must be met for full take-off includ-
ing: an agricultural revolution; investment in infrastructure; the emergence of leading sectors 
in the economy; saving and investment of at least 10% of GDP; and an institutional structure 
conducive to risk-taking and investment.
•
• Countries grow fast and living standards rise when resources shift into industrial activities, be-
cause manufacturing industry experiences considerable static and dynamic returns to scale. 
This is the experience of history and the contemporary experience of the fast-growing countries 
of the world today (Kaldor’s growth laws).
92
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Notes
1.	 ‘Net’ in the sense of making an allowance for investment to cover depreciation of worn-out plant 
and machinery.
2.	 For pioneering studies of structural change, see Chenery and Syrquin (1975) and Chenery et al. 
(1986). For a more recent assessment, see Naqvi (1995).
3.	 Setting g 5 x, and solving for x gives: 2.529/(1 2 0.394) 5 4.17%.
4. An alternative explanation of Kaldor’s first law of growth in an open economy is that export growth 
drives GDP growth, and export growth is faster, the faster the growth of manufacturing output 
(Pacheco-López and Thirlwall, 2014). The importance of export growth for overall growth is dis-
cussed in Chapter 15.
Websites on structural change and income distribution
Labour market statistics
International Labour Organization http://laborsta.ilo.org
Income distribution
University of Texas, Inequality Project utip.gov.utexas.edu
UNU-WIDER www.wider.unu.edu/project/wiid-%E2%80%93-worldincome-inequality-database
Stone Center on Socio-Economic Inequality www.gc.cuny.edu/stonecenter
1.	 What are the major reasons why some countries are rich and others poor?
2.	 What is the importance of the distinction between diminishing returns activities 
and increasing returns activities?
3.	 Why have economists identified a certain ratio of investment to GDP as a neces-
sary condition for self-sustaining growth?
4.	 What are the causes of growing urban unemployment in developing countries?
5.	 What is meant by ‘income measure’ of unemployment?
6.	 Why is the distribution of income more unequal in developing countries than in 
developed countries?
7.	 What major structural changes take place in a country during the course of devel-
opment?
8.	 What contribution does Rostow’s stage theory make to an understanding of the 
development process?
9.	 What accounts for the fact that a close association exists between industrial 
growth and the growth of GDP?
10.	 What is the difference between static and dynamic returns to scale?
Discussion questions
Chapter 3
