184
•
• Introduction
•
• The role of capital in development
•
• Technical progress
•
• Capital- and labour-saving technical progress
•
• How societies progress technologically
•
• Learning
•
• Infrastructure investment
•
• Technology and the developing countries
•
• Techniques of production
•
• The conflict between employment and output and employment 
and saving in the choice of techniques
•
• Employment versus output
•
• Employment versus saving
•
• Future policy
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Note
•
• Websites on technology and investment
CAPITAL ACCUMULATION, 
TECHNICAL PROGRESS AND 
TECHNIQUES OF PRODUCTION
6
185
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
Introduction
Economic growth and development are impossible without capital accumulation. If all the out-
put produced by an economy was consumed, there would be no saving, no investment, and the 
economy would grind to a halt. In this chapter, we discuss the role of physical capital and infra-
structure investment in the development process, leaving the role of human capital formation 
(education and health) to Chapter 7.
Growth depends not only on the quantity of capital invested but also its productivity, which 
largely depends on the technical progress embodied in it. We identify the different meanings 
of technical progress and the types of technical progress that take place – whether it is labour-
saving, capital-saving or neutral – which has implications for employment and the distribution 
of income between wages and profits. The process of learning by doing is a form of technical 
progress, because it improves the productivity of factors of production.
We then explore how societies progress technologically by acquiring the capabilities to invest, 
innovate, undertake R&D and absorb new ideas. Some evidence is given of how backward tech-
nology is in poor countries and the challenge of the magnitude of ‘catch-up’. Finally, we discuss the 
important issue of the choice of techniques of production in developing countries and whether 
labour-abundant economies could move towards the use of more labour-intensive techniques 
without jeopardizing the level of output and saving for future growth. Theory and evidence sug-
gest that the potential clash between employment and output and employment and saving in the 
choice of new techniques is exaggerated.
The role of capital in development
The capital stock of a country increases through the process of net investment, which is the dif-
ference between a country’s net income in an accounting period (that is, gross income minus 
depreciation) and how much it consumes out of that income in the same period. The essence of 
capital accumulation is that it enhances a country’s capacity to produce goods in the future and 
enables it to grow faster.
There are many types of capital goods:
1.	 There are plant and machinery used in factories and offices, which yield no utility directly but 
produce consumption goods and services that do.
2.	 There is infrastructure investment, which partly provides goods and services directly, and at 
the same time makes other forms of investment more productive; for example transport facil­
ities, telecommunications, power generation, the provision of water facilities and so on.
3.	 There is expenditure on research and development (R&D), which may improve the product­
ivity of labour or capital, or both. R&D can lead to new inventions and then to innovation – 
either process innovation or product innovation. Process innovations make the production 
of existing products more efficient; product innovations involve the creation of new prod-
ucts that not only add to utility but also enhance productivity by enabling new ways of doing 
things, for example information technology.
4.	 If capital is defined as any asset that generates an additional future stream of measurable in-
come to society, many goods and services that might be thought of as primarily consumption 
goods ought strictly to be included as part of a country’s capital stock. If cars, for example, 
or other consumer durable goods save time and make people more efficient, part of the ex-
penditure on them should be considered as an investment. Expenditure on housing is another 
186
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
example where private expenditure may be partly considered as consumption and partly in-
vestment; and the public provision of housing might be put in the category of social capital. 
Similarly, if certain types of consumption goods are necessary as incentives to induce peasant 
producers in the agricultural sector, or workers elsewhere, to increase their productivity, they 
too ought to be considered as part of the capital stock.
If it is agreed, therefore, that the only way to build up a country’s productive potential and to 
raise per capita income is to expand the capacity for producing goods, this need not refer simply 
to the provision of physical capital such as plant and machinery, but also to roads, railways, power 
lines, water pipes, schools, hospitals, houses and even ‘incentive’ consumer goods such as con-
sumer durables – all of which can contribute to increased productivity and higher living standards.
When using the production function approach to the study of the sources of growth or the 
macrodeterminants of growth, as described in Chapter 4, it is important to define capital as broadly 
as possible if the relation between capital accumulation and growth is to be properly understood. 
This is in addition to the point, which was also emphasized in Chapter 4, that capital is likely to 
be the main vehicle for the introduction of technical progress in the productive system. In other 
words, capital accumulation is not only important in its own right, but is the major conduit for 
advances in knowledge, which, in turn, are also a major determinant of productivity growth.
Developing economies lay great emphasis on the importance of capital accumulation, and 
stress the need to raise the level of investment as a proportion of national output. A glance at 
any national development plan will testify to this. Development is associated with industrializa-
tion and industrialization with capital accumulation. Many famous development economists in 
the past have picked out investment as the most important single factor in the growth process. 
As we saw in Chapter 3, Rostow (1960) defines the process of ‘take-off’ into sustained growth in 
terms of a critical ratio of investment to national product, and Arthur Lewis (1955) has described 
the process of development as one of transforming a country from being a 5% saver and investor 
to a 12% saver and investor. It is common, in fact, for countries to calculate fairly precise ratios of 
investment to national income that will be required to achieve a particular rate of growth. These 
calculations involve assumptions about the normal relation between capital and output, a rela-
tion that is formally expressed in the concept of the capital–output ratio, which measures how 
much capital stock is required to produce a unit flow of output over an accounting period (nor-
mally one year). If 300 units of capital (from new investment) are required to produce an annual 
flow of 100 units of output, the capital–output ratio is 3.
The returns to investment in developing countries are potentially much higher than in developed 
countries, which already have large quantities of capital per head. In countries where specialization (the 
division of labour) is minimal, the scope for capital to permit more roundabout methods of production 
and increase productivity will be greater than where specialization has already reached a high level of 
sophistication. Moreover, in technologically backward countries, the rate of growth of capital required 
to absorb new technology is likely to be greater than in advanced countries. By definition, technologic­
ally backward countries also have a backlog of technology to make up. Furthermore, in a labour-abun-
dant economy with a low capital–labour ratio, the very act of capital deepening – giving each worker 
a little more capital to work with – may make a substantial difference to total product, much more so 
than in countries where the process of capital deepening has been a continuing process for some length 
of time. All these factors represent important contributions that capital can make to economic pro-
gress, which may be relatively more important, the smaller the initial capital stock of a country relative 
to its population. It is a familiar proposition in economics that the scarcer one factor of production is in 
relation to another, the higher its productivity is likely to be, all other things being equal.
187
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
Capital accumulation is also seen as an escape from the so-called ‘vicious circle of poverty’ – a 
circle of low productivity, leading to low per capita income, leading to a low level of saving per 
head, leading to a low level of capital accumulation per head, leading to low productivity. Low 
productivity is seen as the source of the vicious circle of poverty, and the point where the circle 
must be broken by capital accumulation (see Chapters 10 and 11).
According to research by Hulten and Isaksson (2007), the amount of capital per head of the 
working population in high-income developed countries is $150,000 (in 2000) compared with 
$3,000 in low-income countries, and this difference is one of the major explanations of why labour 
productivity is $52,000 in rich countries and only $2,300 in poor countries.
These huge differences in the amount of capital per head are the cumulative effect of much 
higher levels of savings and investment in rich countries than in poorer countries that cannot, 
or prefer not to, save and invest. A precondition for raising the level of capital per head in poor 
countries is a higher level of investment. There needs to be greater incentives for investment. Case 
example 6.1 contains the conclusions of the World Bank’s World Development Report 2005: A 
Better Investment Climate for Everyone (World Bank, 2004).
The investment climate is central to growth and poverty reduction
Improving the opportunities and incentives for firms of all types to invest productively, 
create jobs and expand should be a top priority for governments. It is not just about in-
creasing the volume of investment but also spurring productivity improvements that 
are the keys to sustainable growth:
•
• The goal is to create a better investment climate for everyone. A good invest-
ment climate benefits society as a whole, not just firms. And it embraces all 
firms, not just large or politically connected firms.
•
• Expanding opportunities for young people is a pressing concern for developing 
countries, where 53% of people live on less than US$2 a day, youths have more 
than double the average unemployment rate, and populations are growing rapidly.
Reducing unjustified costs is critical, but policy-related risks and 
­
barriers to competition also need to be tackled
Costs, risks and barriers to competition all matter for firms and thus for growth and 
poverty reduction:
•
• Costs associated with weak contract enforcement, inadequate infrastructure, crime, 
corruption and regulation can amount to over 25% of sales – or more than three 
times what firms typically pay in taxes.
•
• Firms in developing countries rate policy uncertainty as their top concern. This and 
other sources of policy-related risk – such as insecure property rights, macroeconomic 
instability and arbitrary ­
regulation– chill incentives to invest. Improving policy pre-
dictability can increase the likelihood of new investment by over 30%.
•
• Barriers to competition benefit some firms but deny opportunities and increase 
costs to other firms and consumers. They also weaken incentives for protected firms 
to innovate and improve their productivity. Increasing competitive pressure can in-
crease the probability of firm innovation by more than 50%.
Case example 6.1
Main messages from World Development Report 2005 on investment
continued overleaf
188
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Technical progress
The term ‘technical progress’ is used in several different senses to describe a variety of phenom-
ena, but three in particular can be singled out:
1.	 Economists use the term to refer to the effects of changes in technology, and specifically to 
the role of technical change in the growth process. It is in this sense that the term was used in 
Chapter 4; that is, as an umbrella term to cover all those factors that contribute to the growth 
of ‘total’ factor productivity.
2.	 Technical progress is used by economists in a narrow specialist sense to describe the character 
of technical improvements, and is often prefaced for this purpose by the adjectives ‘labour-
saving’, ‘capital-saving’ or ‘neutral’.
3.	 Technical progress is used more literally to refer to changes in technology itself, defining tech-
nology as useful knowledge pertaining to the art of production. Used in this sense, the empha-
sis is on describing improvements in the design, sophistication and performance of plant and 
machinery, and the economic activities through which improvements come about – by R&D, 
invention and innovation.
Having already discussed technical progress in the first sense in Chapter 4, we concentrate 
here on the narrow specialist descriptions of technical progress, and on how societies progress 
technologically.
Case example 6.1
Main messages from World Development Report 2005 on investment – continued
Progress requires more than changes to formal policies
Over 90% of firms claim gaps between formal rules and what happens in practice, 
and the informal economy accounts for more than half of output in many developing 
countries. Creating a better investment climate requires governments to bridge these 
gaps and to tackle the deeper sources of policy failure that undermine a sound invest-
ment climate. This requires efforts to:
•
• Restrain corruption and other forms of rent-seeking that increase costs and distort 
policies
•
• Build policy credibility to give firms the confidence to invest
•
• Foster the public trust required to enable and sustain policy improvements
•
• Ensure policy responses are crafted to fit local conditions.
Investment climate improvements are a process, not an event
Government policies and behaviours influencing the investment climate cover a wide 
field. But everything does not have to be fixed at once, and perfection on even a single 
policy dimension is not required. Significant progress can be made by addressing the 
important constraints facing firms in a way that gives them the confidence to invest – 
and by sustaining a process of ongoing improvements.
Because constraints differ widely across and even within countries, priorities need 
to be assessed in each case. Reform processes benefit from effective public communi-
cation and other measures to build consensus and maintain momentum.
Source: World Bank, 2004.
189
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
Capital- and labour-saving technical progress
The classification of technical progress as to whether it is capital-saving, labour-saving or neutral 
owes its origins primarily to the work of Harrod (1948) and Hicks (1932). Their criteria of clas-
sification differ, however. Harrod’s classification of technical progress employs the concept of 
the capital–output ratio. Given the rate of profit, technical change is said to be capital-saving if it 
lowers the capital–output ratio, labour-saving if it raises the capital–output ratio, and neutral if it 
leaves the capital–output ratio unchanged.
The nature of technical progress by this criterion will be an amalgam of the effect of ‘pure’ 
technical change on factor combinations on the one hand and the effect of the substitution of 
capital for labour on the other (as, for example, relative factor prices change). As such, Harrod 
neutrality at the aggregate level is quite consistent with capital-saving technical progress at the 
industry level. In fact, most of the evidence for advanced countries suggests that if technical pro-
gress is neutral in the aggregate in the Harrod sense, this must be due to substitution of capital for 
labour because ‘pure’ technical advance has saved capital. The substitution of capital for labour 
takes place because as countries become richer, the price of labour relative to capital tends to rise, 
which not only induces a ‘pure’ substitution effect but also encourages inventive effort towards 
saving labour, which is becoming relatively expensive (and scarce).
Hicks’s classification of technical progress takes the concept of the marginal rate of substi-
tution between factors, which is the rate at which one factor must be substituted for another, 
leaving output unchanged. The marginal rate of substitution is given by the ratio of the marginal 
products of factors. Holding constant the ratio of labour to capital, technical progress is said to be:
•
• capital-saving if it raises the marginal product of labour in greater proportion than the ­
marginal 
product of capital
•
• labour-saving if it raises the marginal product of capital in greater proportion than the ­
marginal 
product of labour
•
• neutral if it leaves unchanged the ratio of marginal products.
These definitions are illustrated in Figures 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3, respectively.
It will be recalled from Chapter 4 that technical progress on a production function map is 
represented by shifts in the function towards the origin, showing that the same output can be 
produced with fewer inputs, or that the same volume of inputs can produce a greater output. 
According to the shape of the new production function, fewer of either one or both factors will be 
required to produce the same output. In the case of neutral technical progress, a quantity of both 
factors can be dispensed with. In the case of non-neutral technical progress, if only one factor is 
K
Y
Z
Q
P
Y
K1
L2
L1
Y1
L
K2
Y1
P1
Z1
K3
Capital
0
Labour
Figure 6.1  Capital-saving technical progress
190
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
saved, technical progress is said to be absolutely labour- or capital-saving. If fewer of both factors 
are required, technical progress is said to be relatively labour- or capital-saving.
Consider first neutral technical progress (Figure 6.3). The ray from the origin, or expansion 
path, 0Z, goes through the minimum cost point of tangency between the production function YY 
and the factor–price ratio line KL. With neutral technical progress the production function shifts 
to Y1Y1 such that the new point of tangency at the same factor–price ratio lies on the same expan-
sion path. This means that the ratio of marginal products is the same at the same capital–labour 
ratio, and equal proportionate amounts of the two factors are saved. The condition for neutral 
technical progress is simply that the new production function is parallel to the old.
With labour-saving technical change (Figure 6.2) the ratio of the marginal product of capital 
to the marginal product of labour rises so as to shift the minimum cost point of tangency from 
the old expansion path 0Z to a new expansion path 0Z1. At P1, where the new production function 
(Y1Y1) cuts the old expansion path, the ratio of the marginal product of labour to capital is lower 
than at P. P1 is not an equilibrium point and it will pay producers to move to point Q, substitut-
ing capital for labour. The ratio of marginal products has not remained unchanged at a constant 
labour–capital ratio, and L2L3 labour is saved. The isoquants have been so drawn as to keep the 
volume of capital the same, but this is for expositional purposes only.
Capital-saving technical progress (Figure 6.1) may be described in an exactly analogous fash-
ion. In this case, the ratio of the marginal product of labour to the marginal product of capital rises 
and the shift in the production function (to Y1Y1) is such that the minimum cost point of tan-
K
Y
Z
Q
P
Y
K1
L3
L2
L1
Y1
L
K2
Y1
P1
Z1
Capital
0
Labour
Figure 6.2  Labour-saving technical progress
K
Y
Z
Q
P
Y
K1
L3
L2
L1
Y1
L
K2
K3
Y1
Capital
0
Labour
Figure 6.3  Neutral technical progress
191
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
gency now lies to the right of the old expansion path. At P1, where the new production function 
cuts the old expansion path, the ratio of the marginal product of labour to capital is higher than 
at P. Again, P1 is not an equilibrium point and it will pay producers to move to point Q, substitut-
ing labour for capital. The ratio of marginal products has not remained unchanged at a constant 
labour–capital ratio, and in this case K2K3 capital is saved.
As with Harrod technical progress, it is difficult to know what form Hicks technical progress 
takes in practice, largely because of identification problems. While the classification is analytically 
distinct, how does one distinguish empirically between a change in factor proportions due to a 
shift in the production function and a change in factor proportions due to a change in relative 
prices? Hicks himself seemed to be of the view that technical progress is relatively labour-saving, 
but the indirect evidence we have for this is slight. For example, given the magnitude of the rise 
in the price of labour relative to capital and an elasticity of substitution close to unity, labour 
could not have maintained or increased its share of the national income (as it has done slightly in 
some advanced countries) if technical progress was markedly biased in the labour-saving direc-
tion. If technical progress is biased in one direction or another, its major impact will be on factor 
utilization if the price of factors is not flexible. The type of technology employed, and the factor 
proportions it entails, must bear a major responsibility for the high level of unemployment and 
underemployment in developing countries, as described in Chapter 3. We examine the case for 
the use of more labour-intensive techniques of production later in this chapter.
How societies progress technologically
Improvements in the art of production, which is the most literal interpretation of technical pro-
gress, result from a combination of R&D, invention and innovation. R&D and invention are the 
activities that ‘create’ knowledge, and innovation is the activity that applies new knowledge to 
the task of production. These are all basically economic activities. But the study of the way in 
which societies progress technologically, and the speed of progress, is not only the preserve of the 
economist.
The economist can identify the mainsprings of progress, but their pervasiveness and accept-
ance in societies is not a purely economic matter. The spread of new knowledge, for example, 
depends on its rate of adoption and diffusion and this raises questions of individual motivation, 
the willingness of societies to assimilate new ideas and to break with custom and tradition, which 
impinge heavily on territory occupied by development sociologists. The relative importance of 
different factors contributing to progress, and the speed of progress itself, will vary from country 
to country according to the stage of development and a whole complex of socioeconomic forces. 
Moreover, many of the mainsprings of technological progress are not mutually exclusive. At the 
risk of excessive simplification, attention here will be confined to four main sources of progress 
that are of potential significance to any society.
One major source of improvement in technology and progress is the inventive and innovative 
activity of the population. All societies are endowed to some degree with a potential supply of 
inventors, innovators and risk-takers, and in the absence of imported technology and personnel, 
it is on the emergence of this class of person that technological progress will primarily depend 
during the early stages of development. Economic backwardness in many countries may quite 
legitimately be traced back to a relative shortage of inventors, innovators and risk-takers. It is 
fairly well established that some cultures and some environments are more amenable to change 
than others, and have, in the past, produced a greater supply of entrepreneurs. One of the major 
192
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
sources of growth during Britain’s Industrial Revolution was technological progress fostered by 
an abundant supply of inventors, innovators, entrepreneurs and risk-takers. The great Austrian 
economist Joseph Schumpeter (1934, 1943) laid great stress on the role of the entrepreneur and 
innovation in the development process. Ultimately, however, it is the lag between the creation of 
knowledge and its adoption, and the rate of dissemination of new knowledge, that most directly 
affects the rate of measured technical progress between countries; and these two facets of innov­
ation are influenced by the attitudes of society to change.
For Schumpeter, progress results from what he called the process of creative destruction, 
which is bound up with innovation and instigated by competition. Innovation, in turn, is the driv-
ing force behind competition. But innovation requires decision-takers and hence his complemen-
tary stress on the role of the entrepreneur. A characteristic of many poor countries is a shortage 
of decision-takers, a relative lack of competitive spirit, and a general aversion to risk-taking. These 
may be partly cultural traits and also partly, if not mainly, a function of the stage of development 
itself. The characteristics commonly associated with business dynamism are themselves a func-
tion of business and, more particularly, the form of organization we call ‘capitalism’.
There is an enormous technological divide in the world economy, which acts as a serious barrier 
to narrowing the gap between rich and poor countries. A small number of countries (accounting 
for about 15% of the world’s population) produce nearly 50% of the world’s technological innov­
ations. A number of other countries (containing 50% of the world’s population) are able to adopt 
some or all of these technologies. The remaining countries (containing one-third of the world’s 
poorest people) are almost entirely excluded from technological progress. These latter countries 
are also the areas of the world most affected by low agricultural productivity, malnutrition and 
disease. They need technology to raise productivity and to improve health, but cannot afford or 
assimilate it.
The major channels of technical diffusion across countries are trade (see Grossman and 
Helpman, 1991) and foreign direct investment (FDI) (see Keller, 2004, for a survey of the impact 
of these channels on economic performance). Countries can import technology embodied in 
intermediate imports or final goods, they can obtain it on licence from patent holders, or they 
can attract FDI, which brings technology with it. The spread of technology and ideas may also 
be expected to come about naturally in the general process of commercial intercourse and 
the exchange of information through trade. This is one of the dynamic gains from trade (see 
Chapter 15). But not all countries have equal access to technology. Geography, culture, insti-
tutions and the quality of human capital matter. The speed with which modern technology is 
absorbed by economically backward countries will depend on the same class of factors as the 
diffusion of knowledge within countries, which, in the final analysis, amounts to the receptiveness 
of all sections of the community to change, and the ability to assimilate new ways of doing things. 
Some economists argue that the World Bank should focus more of its lending to countries specifi-
cally for knowledge creation and assimilation.
New technology and its diffusion could lead to greater divergence in the world economy 
if richer countries are more adept at adopting foreign technology than poorer countries. This 
underlines the importance of identifying the major determinants of technical diffusion. The two 
most important variables are human capital and R&D, which determine absorptive capacity. 
According to a study by Fagerberg et al. (2007), of 90 countries over the period 1980–2002, the 
superior growth of innovative activity is the main factor behind the difference in economic per-
formance between the newly industrializing countries of Asia on the one hand, and Latin America 
and Africa on the other. Growth rate differences between open economies can be explained in 
terms of technological competitiveness, which is the capacity to absorb technology and to exploit 
193
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
knowledge from elsewhere; price competitiveness, which is a function of new technologies that 
reduce costs; and non-price competitiveness, which largely depends on product innovation.
Learning
A third means by which societies progress technologically, gradually raising their efficiency and 
productivity, is through the process of learning by doing, which refers to the accumulation 
of experience by workers, managers and owners of capital in the course of production, which 
en­
ables productive efficiency to be improved in the future. It is a learning process that Adam 
Smith referred to when discussing the benefits of division of labour (see Chapter 4). Smith 
stressed the importance of the division of labour for three main reasons: as a means of improving 
the dexterity of workers, to save the time lost in the absence of specialization, and to encourage 
the invention of machines that facilitate and abridge labour to improve the productivity of labour. 
All these advantages of the division of labour are part of a learning process. Labour improves its 
skill through specialization and work experience, and becomes more adept at the job in hand. 
Managers see deficiencies in organization, which can subsequently be remedied; and on the basis 
of accumulated knowledge, they are also able to embody more productive techniques in the 
capital stock.
Learning may be regarded as either endogenous or exogenous, or both, depending on the 
factor of production considered. If existing labour and existing capital are subject to a learning 
process, then learning by doing may be regarded as exogenous and part of disembodied technical 
progress. If, however, it is assumed that learning enters the productive system only through the 
addition of new factors, then learning by doing must be regarded as endogenous. This is the basis 
of Kenneth Arrow’s capital model (1962), from which the term ‘learning by doing’ originates. His 
hypothesis with respect to capital is that, at any moment of time, new capital goods incorporate 
all the knowledge then available, based on accumulated experience, but once built, their product­
ive efficiency cannot be altered by subsequent learning.
The endogenous model may be appropriate in the case of capital but is much less relevant in 
the case of labour. It is in relation to labour that most research into the learning process has been 
conducted. The notion of the learning curve, or progress function, which has been found in many 
industries, relates direct labour input per unit of output to cumulative output as the measure 
of experience. Typically, labour input per unit of output is found to decline by 10–20% for each 
doubling of cumulative output, with a corresponding rise in the productivity of labour. For any 
one product, of course, learning cannot go on at the same rate forever, but since product types 
are constantly changing, it is probably safe to conclude that at the aggregate level, over time, there 
is no limit to the learning process.
Infrastructure investment
Another major type of investment that is very important to developing countries is infrastructure 
investment. Just as the productivity of physical capital depends on investment in human capital, 
so it also depends on the existence of infrastructure investment, for example in transport and 
power facilities. Good infrastructure improves productivity and reduces production costs in the 
private sector. Apart from this obvious benefit, the adequacy of infrastructure can make a crucial 
difference to a country’s development programme in a number of ways, such as diversifying pro-
duction, expanding trade, improving environmental conditions, and reducing poverty.
194
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
For poor farmers, improved infrastructure will reduce input costs, increase agricultural output 
and reduce traders’ monopoly by improving access to markets. Over half of African farmers are 
cut off from national and world markets because of poor infrastructure and market access. Better 
transport means greater access to public services, including schools, hospitals and other health-
care facilities. In this way, infrastructure investment can help to meet some of the Sustainable 
Development Goals in the field of education, health and gender equality that we discussed in 
Chapter 2. Research at the World Bank (2005) across 73 countries shows that a 10% improvement 
in a country’s infrastructure index is associated with a 5% reduction in child mortality, a 3.5% 
reduction in infant mortality, and a 7.8% reduction in maternal mortality (linked to safer water 
supply, sanitation and easier access to hospitals). Piped water promotes gender equality by freeing 
women who traditionally spend hours a day collecting water from wells.
Research at the macro-level shows a significant positive effect of infrastructure investment on 
output, productivity and growth. Calderón et al. (2015) take a panel of 88 developed and develop-
ing countries over the period 1960–2000 and estimate an output elasticity with respect to a multi­
dimensional index of different types of infrastructure of between 0.07 and 0.10. The results are 
highly significant and robust and mean that, on average, a doubling of infrastructure investment 
would increase total output (GDP) by about 10%. Likewise, Arslanalp et al. (2011) of the World 
Bank have studied the impact of public investment (mainly infrastructure) on economic growth 
across 48 developed and developing countries over the period 1960–2001 and find a significant 
positive impact, allowing the responsiveness of output to public capital to vary with the initial 
stock of public capital itself. The elasticity of growth tends to be higher, the lower the initial level 
of public capital, rising to nearly 0.2 and then falling close to zero.
Currently, developing countries spend nearly a $1 trillion a year on new infrastructure – 
­
transport, power, water, sanitation, telecommunications, irrigation and so on, equal to 20% of 
total investment and approximately 5% of GDP – and the need for such investment is still huge. 
One billion people still lack access to clean water, 2 billion people lack access to sanitation (includ-
ing 500 million in India alone) and electric power, and transport facilities are still rudimentary in 
many developing countries. The Asian Development Bank has estimated that $8 trillion of invest-
ment is needed between 2010 and 2020, mainly for roads, electricity and telecommunications. To 
meet this need in Asia, China announced in 2015 the establishment of a new Asian Infrastructure 
Investment Bank (AIIB), based in Beijing, with 57 founding member countries and initial capital 
of £50 billion, expected to rise to over $100 billion. It is seen by the USA as a rival to the World 
Bank (largely controlled by the USA) and so has not joined; neither has Japan, which has a hold 
on the Asian Development Bank. Given the need for infrastructure investment, however, none of 
these banks should see themselves as rivals, but as complements.
Most infrastructure investment is undertaken by governments. The public sector owns, oper-
ates and finances virtually all infrastructure because it is either regarded as a natural monopoly 
or a public good. Without competition and accountability, however, there can be a great deal of 
inefficiency and waste. The underutilization of capacity can be a major problem in transport and 
power because of lack of maintenance. The World Bank (1994) calculates that raising operating 
efficiency to best-practice levels could save over $50 billion a year, and that the greater private 
provision of infrastructure and the recoupment of costs from users could reduce government 
subsidies by over $100 billion.
The World Bank (1994) has called for a shift of emphasis ‘from increasing the quantity of infra-
structure stocks to improving the quality of infrastructure services’, and a change of thinking from 
the view that infrastructure services can only be provided by government. It makes three major 
recommendations:
195
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
1.	 The wider application of commercial principles, including managerial autonomy and the set-
ting of performance targets.
2.	 The introduction of more competition, for example arranging for suppliers to compete for an 
entire market.
3.	 The increased involvement of users so that suppliers respond to user needs.
Technology and the developing countries
Most technological improvement originates from developed countries. The Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries spend over $800 billion a year on 
R&D, and account for more than 90% of patents issued. If developing countries are to develop 
their own technology, there needs to be the right institutional environment, including an incen-
tive structure through patents, sound infrastructure, political stability to attract investment 
funds, and the availability of credit. Some of the technological leaders among developing coun-
tries include Singapore, Taiwan, India, South Korea, Malaysia, China, Mexico, Thailand, Philippines 
and Brazil, measured by the share of medium- and high-technology manufactures in total manu-
facturing value-added.
Technology is currently making a contribution to development in three major fields: agricul-
ture, health, and information and communications technology (ICT). In agriculture, the impact 
of the Green Revolution in the 1960s and 1970s has now diminished, but on the horizon is bio-
technology with the potential to end world hunger through the use of genetically modified (GM) 
foods and crops. The advantage of GM technology is that it allows the transfer of traits between 
unrelated species. For example, a gene in one species associated with the ability to resist drought 
can be directly transferred into the genetic code of another species. We now have GM crops more 
resistant to viruses and insects and more tolerant of herbicides; in the future, we could have food 
with extra vitamins and protein, and even vaccines to combat malnutrition and disease. In the late 
1990s, China gave 26 approvals for GM crops, including transgenic peppers, tomatoes, rice and 
cotton. China has the advantage of being an authoritarian regime. Other countries – including 
India, China’s main economic rival – have had to deal with public protests against GM technology, 
with invasion of field trials and burning of GM crops.
In health, new technology and advances in medicine have been the biggest single factor in 
reducing mortality and increasing life expectancy in developing countries. Important discoveries 
include vaccines against influenza, smallpox, polio, measles, tuberculosis, antibiotics (penicillin), 
and oral rehydration therapy – which was originally developed in Bangladesh and has saved mil-
lions of babies from dying from diarrhoea. Biotechnology and genomics offer new ways to cure 
disease by altering genes that contribute to cancer, or boosting genes that might fight it.
ICT can provide enormous benefits to developing countries, both as consumers and produ­
cers. Any task that can be digitized can now be done at a distance, which gives the opportunity 
for low-cost countries to develop ICT industries. India’s software industry now employs nearly 
2 million people. Call centres are one of the fastest-growing industries in the subcontinent. For 
consumers, access to information through the internet can be of benefit in almost any field – for 
weather information in agriculture, the dissemination of knowledge in healthcare and the track-
ing of diseases, and for distance learning in education. Telephone banking is revolutionizing access 
to finance and credit in African countries.
Case example 6.2 describes the World Bank’s views on bridging the technology divide between 
rich and poor countries.
196
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Technological progress – improvements in the ways that goods and services are pro-
duced, marketed, and brought to market – is at the very heart of human advancement 
and development. It has helped reduce the share of people living in absolute poverty 
in developing countries from 29% in 1990 to 18% in 2004. As a result, the technol-
ogy gap between rich and poor countries has narrowed, although it remains wide. 
Low-income countries employ only one-fourth the technology used in high-income 
countries.
Technological progress in developing countries (that is, low-income, lower middle-
income, and upper middle-income countries) outstripped progress in high-income 
countries between the early 1990s and 2000s. Of course, the initial level of technology 
in lower income countries was much lower to begin with.
 The very strong technological progress developing countries have enjoyed has 
come mainly from adopting and absorbing existing technologies. Compared with the 
size of their economies, they perform relatively little new-to-the-world innovation.
 The diffusion of technology across developing countries has been facilitated by 
their increased exposure to foreign technologies. Over the past 15 years, FDI levels 
and imports of high-tech and capital goods have doubled as a percentage of GDP – 
in part because of contacts with well-educated migrant populations living abroad.
 Slow diffusion within countries means that, although individual cities may be tech-
nology leaders, the use of technology in a country as a whole may be low. For instance, 
while more than one in two urban Indian families has mobile phone access, only one 
in 10 in the rural sector does.
 Partly as a result of this increased exposure, newer technology – such as mobile 
phones, computers and the internet – now spreads much more quickly. In the early 
1900s, new technology took more than 50 years to reach most countries; today it takes 
about 16 years. But technology tends to spread slowly within countries because many 
developing countries lack the technical skills necessary to master new, or even older, 
technologies.
 Although better macroeconomic and educational policies, as well as the spread 
of older enabling technologies – such as electrical networks, road infrastructure, tele­
phone land lines, and sanitation networks – have advanced the spread of technology 
in developing countries, progress has been slow and the capacity to absorb new ideas 
and techniques remains weak.
Closing the gap
To continue catching up with high-income countries, developing countries need to:
•
• Maintain exposure to foreign technologies through trade openness, foreign direct 
investment, and the participation of migrant populations.
•
• Further improve the investment climate to allow innovative firms to grow.
•
• Invest in enabling technologies and basic infrastructure, such as roads, electricity 
and telephones.
•
• Improve the quality and increase the quantity of education throughout the economy – 
not just in major centres.
•
• Emphasize technology diffusion by reinforcing dissemination systems and the mar-
ket orientation of R&D programmes.
Source: Burns, 2008.
Case example 6.2
Bridging the technology divide
197
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
Techniques of production
If labour is more abundant and capital is scarcer in developing countries than in developed coun-
tries, we might expect to observe the use of more labour-intensive techniques of production in 
the industrial sector of developing countries, reflecting a lower price of labour relative to capital. 
Figure 6.4 shows this. Assuming the same production function in the two sets of countries, labelled 
‘1’, and holding everything else constant, the lower relative price of labour in the developing coun-
try, given by the price line (or isocost curve), cb, gives a more labour-intensive choice of technique 
than in the developed country, where the relative price of labour is given by the steeper line ad.
In the developed country, the capital–labour ratio is given by the ray from the origin, DC, 
while in the less-developed country, the capital–labour ratio is given by the ray LDC; both rays 
pass through the point of tangency between the price line and production function – A and B, 
respectively.
In practice, however, it is often the case that for the same outputs produced, the capital inten-
sity of techniques is not very different between the two sets of countries, and that the capital–
labour ratio differs between developed and developing countries in the aggregate only to the 
extent that the composition of output differs; that is, because there are large sectors in develop-
ing countries’ economies where very little capital is employed at all, as in subsistence farming 
and petty service activities. In the modern sectors of developing countries, however, techniques 
are much more capital-intensive than would be predicted on the basis of knowledge of factor 
endowments. Given the supply of labour available, and given the rate of investment, the more 
capital-intensive the techniques, the less employment and the more unemployment there will be.
Unemployment and underemployment are major preoccupations in developing countries, and 
are one reason why the prevailing techniques of production might be regarded as ‘inappropriate’.
But what accounts for this relative capital intensity of modern sector techniques, and would 
developing countries be better off using more labour-intensive techniques? There are a number of 
reasons why technological choice sometimes appears to be little different in developing countries 
than in technologically advanced societies.
First, for a large number of commodities, there may not be a spectrum of techniques to choose 
from; that is, in practice, the production function in Figure 6.4 may not be smooth, and a country 
cannot move from point A to B in accordance with differences in relative factor endowments and 
d
c
a
b
DC
LDC
0
1
Labour
B
A
1
Capital
Figure 6.4  Optimal choice of technique
198
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
relative factor prices. We are talking here, of course, about techniques that are profitable. There may 
always be more labour-intensive techniques using more labour and capital, but then the output 
would not be competitively saleable. If there is not a spectrum of profitable techniques of produc-
tion, and the coefficients of production are fixed, the production function is L-shaped (sometimes 
called a Leontief production function, after Wassily Leontief, the ‘father’ of input–output analysis, 
which assumes no substitutability between capital and labour). Whether technology is such that 
there is only one profitable technique, or whether there are many but developing countries do not 
have access to them, is an empirical question we shall consider later in the chapter.
A second reason for the relative capital intensity of production in developing countries is that 
the market prices of factors of production frequently do not reflect relative abundance or scarcity. 
This tendency is often exacerbated by developing countries themselves, which give generous sub-
sidies to scarce capital and encourage high wages in the modern manufacturing sector by the gov-
ernment paying high wages to its own employees. The old justification for using capital-intensive 
techniques, which governments used to believe in and still do to some extent, was that they are 
necessary to maximize output and saving, and that more labour-intensive techniques would reduce 
the level of output and saving because of their relative inefficiency and higher wage bills. Later in 
the chapter, we shall examine these contentions; but, clearly, the cheaper that capital is made by 
subsidies, and the higher wages are above their ‘shadow’ price, the more capital-intensive the tech-
niques will tend to be.
A third factor to bear in mind is that although labour may be abundant and the money wage 
may be lower than in developed countries, it is not necessarily ‘cheaper’ or less ‘costly’ to employ, 
because its productivity may be lower. In other words, the so-called efficiency wage (that is, the 
wage rate divided by the productivity of labour), or wage costs per unit of output, may differ very 
little between developing and developed countries. This means that the production function for 
the developing country in Figure 6.4 above will lie outside the production function for the devel-
oped country in such a way that even if the relative money wage of labour is lower in the develop-
ing country, it is profitable to choose a relatively capital-intensive technique. Figure 6.5 shows this. 
The production function for the developing country is labelled ‘2’. Even though labour is cheaper 
relative to capital in the developing country (slope of cb , slope of ad), nonetheless the most 
profitable capital–labour ratio will be the same in both countries (given by the ray from the origin, 
DC 5 LDC). It is probably because abundant labour is not necessarily ‘cheap’, in a cost per unit of 
output sense, that accounts for the observation that, in trade, developing countries’ exports are 
sometimes as capital-intensive as in developed countries, contrary to the prediction of certain 
trade theories. This apparent paradox (sometimes called the Leontief paradox) can be explained 
d
c
a
b
DC = LDC
0
1
2
Labour
Capital
Figure 6.5  Different wages: same technique
199
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
by the fact that it is the ‘efficiency’ wage that matters, not the money wage, and while the money 
wage may be low in developing countries, the ‘efficiency’ wage is relatively high.
Fourth, in certain instances, capital intensity may be explained by a skill constraint. Typically, 
labour-intensive techniques require a great deal of skilled labour, compared with capital-intensive 
techniques which mainly require a preponderance of semi-skilled labour to undertake routine 
tasks. In developing countries that are short of skilled manpower, capital may substitute for skills 
and constitute a rational response on the part of decision-makers, whoever they may be.
But perhaps the overriding factor that accounts for the relative capital intensity of the mod-
ern sector of developing countries is that many, if not most, of the techniques of production 
are imported from abroad, with a heavy bias in the labour-saving direction. The techniques may 
either be employed by indigenous firms or, as increasingly seems to be the case, by large foreign-
owned multinational corporations, which invest in the country and bring their technology with 
them. In this case, the technology may be ‘inappropriate’ not because there is not a spectrum of 
techniques to choose from or an inappropriate selection is made, but because the technology 
available is circumscribed by the global profit-maximizing motives of the companies investing in 
the developing country concerned. The labour-saving bias of the technology is to be explained 
by the labour-saving bias of technical progress in advanced countries where labour is relatively 
scarce and expensive. As we saw earlier (Figure 6.2), labour-saving bias on a production function 
diagram is represented by a non-uniform inward shift in the production function, causing capital 
to be substituted for labour at the same ratio of relative factor prices.
If developed countries have designed labour-saving technologies that, through the process 
of international investment, are now being widely used in developing countries, it might well be 
asked: Why have developing countries not invented capital-saving technologies to economize on 
scarce capital? The answer is that if a country is to develop technology to save capital, it must have 
a capital goods industry, but typically the capital goods sector of developing countries is rudi-
mentary or non-existent. With a large fraction of investment goods coming from abroad, coupled 
with a lack of domestic knowhow, there has been very little incentive for developing countries to 
establish their own capital goods industries.
Capital goods production is characterized by the ability to specialize, but to do this economic­
ally requires a large market – a much larger market than for homogeneous consumer products 
that can reap economies of scale. Capital saving also comes from improvement in the efficiency 
of capital goods production itself, but without a capital goods sector there cannot be innovations, 
and an important source of capital saving and technical progress in the economy as a whole is 
lost. It is widely recognized that a capital goods sector is essential for innovatory activity in the 
economy as a whole, and if developing countries are to reduce their dependence on imported 
technology, priority must be given to the establishment and nurture of an indigenous capital 
goods sector (for a lucid discussion of these issues, see Stewart, 1977, especially Chapter 6).
The empirical evidence on multinational corporations and the choice of techniques is mixed. 
Lall (1978) distinguishes three separate issues:
1.	 Whether the technologies used by multinationals are adaptable to abundant labour and low 
wage conditions in developing countries.
2.	 Whether multinationals do adapt the technologies they transfer.
3.	 Whether multinationals adapt better or worse than local firms.
Regarding the first question, the technologies used by multinationals are unlikely to be very ­
flexible 
because the companies tend to predominate in modern industries where processes are complex, 
continuous and, by their very nature, capital-intensive. Outside processing, however, ancillary 
200
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
activities, such as the handling of materials and packaging, may be amenable to substitution. On 
the second issue, it is unlikely that multinationals will undertake major, expensive alterations to 
technology simply to suit local conditions, and there is not much evidence that they do so.
With regard to the third matter, however, in comparison with local firms, the experience of the 
multinationals seems to be mixed. The problem here is that when making comparisons, like must 
be compared with like; that is, local and foreign firms must be compared in the same market, 
producing similar products with equal access to technology. Studies must therefore be treated 
with caution. It is easy to reach the conclusion that multinationals are more capital-intensive than 
local firms if they operate in different industries producing different products. This is, in fact, often 
the case, as they tend to be concentrated in activities that are intrinsically more capital-intensive 
such as heavy industries and extractive industries. We shall say more about the empirical evidence 
below, and more about multinational corporations in Chapter 14, where we consider the role of 
FDI in the development process.
We turn now to the potential conflict between moving towards the use of more labour-inten-
sive techniques of production and output on the one hand, and saving on the other.
The conflict between employment and output and employment  
and saving in the choice of techniques
Developing countries have three broad objectives: to raise the level of present consumption, to 
raise the level of future consumption (by saving now), and to raise the level of employment. In the 
choice of new techniques, a conflict between objectives may arise. First, a technique that maximizes 
employment may involve a sacrifice of output. Second, a technique that maximizes employment 
may involve a sacrifice of saving. As we have mentioned already, certainly one of the justifications 
for the use of modern capital-intensive technology used to be that labour-intensive techniques 
would reduce output and the investible surplus. We need to look at this matter theoretically and 
empirically. We shall argue that while, in theory, there may be a conflict, the assumptions on which 
a potential conflict is based are either invalid or too extreme, and that, in practice, developing coun-
tries could move towards the use of more labour-intensive techniques without sacrificing the level 
of present or future consumption. Some of the empirical evidence would seem to bear this out.
Employment versus output
A potential conflict between employment and output exists in the choice of new techniques 
because methods that employ high labour–capital ratios may involve high capital–output ratios 
because labour productivity is lower.1 Assume that a fixed amount of capital, £1,000, is to be 
invested. Technique I employs 100 persons with an incremental capital–output ratio of 5, giving 
an annual flow of output of £200. Technique II employs 50 persons with an incremental capital–
output ratio of 4, giving an annual flow of output of £250. Therefore the technique that maximizes 
employment has a lower flow of current output.
It should be said straight away that there is very little evidence, if any, to support the view that 
labour-intensive techniques have higher capital–output ratios than capital-intensive techniques. 
On the contrary, there is growing evidence that labour can be substituted for capital, provided 
cooperating factors are available, without the level of output being impaired. One interesting 
­
pioneer study is that by Pack (1974), using UN data on capital per unit of output (K/O) and labour 
201
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
per unit of output (L/O) for 6 commodities in 16 firms across 10 countries. Pack plots the observa-
tions of (K/O) and (L/O) (as in Figure 6.6) for each commodity from the cross-section data, and 
then defines the efficiency frontier to estimate the elasticity of substitution along it.
Each scatter point in Figure 6.6 represents country observations for one industry, say cotton 
textiles, of the relative amounts of capital and labour employed per unit of output. The efficiency 
frontier (or unit isoquant) is drawn through the points closest to the origin and the elasticity of 
substitution is calculated as:
(K/L)i
(K/L)j
5 c(w/r)i
(w/r)j
d
s
 
where w/r is the wage-rental ratio, i and j are the two observations closest to the origin, and s 
is the elasticity of substitution. For five of the six commodities, there is a large difference in the 
amount of capital per worker year used by countries on the efficiency frontier and a fairly high 
elasticity of substitution. The results are shown in Table 6.1.
K/O
L/O
0
Figure 6.6  Efficiency frontier
Table 6.1  Capital–labour substitution possibilities
Industry
Countries on the 
efficiency frontier
Capital per 
worker year ($)
Elasticity of 
substitution (s)
Bicycles
India
400
0.24
Japan
520
Grain milling
Japan
280
3.70
Israel
6,410
Paints
India
214
1.60
Middle Europe
2,790
Tyres
Iran
6,240
1.50
Mexico
10,600
Cotton textiles
India
1,100
2.00
Mexico
8,240
Woollen textiles
India
260
1.20
Japan
4,600
202
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
The results suggest that for countries using large amounts of capital per unit of labour, there 
are more labour-intensive techniques available (as used by other countries) that could be adopted 
without sacrificing output, unless the cooperating factors associated with the increased labour 
intensity are not available. One interesting observation from Pack’s work is that India is invari-
ably either on or close to the efficiency frontier, and hence is using labour-intensive techniques 
effectively.
Pack’s study (1976) of 42 plants in Kenyan manufacturing also suggests that there appears 
to be considerable ex ante choice of capital intensity in most industries, particularly outside the 
processing sector in the auxiliary activities of material receiving, material handling among pro-
cesses, packaging and storage of the finished products. In fact, many auxiliary activities are already 
very labour-intensive, and contrary to the conventional wisdom, it was found that foreign-owned 
firms generally used more labour-intensive techniques than indigenous firms. Pack ascribes this to 
the better managerial expertise and technical training of personnel in foreign firms. Forsyth and 
Solomon (1977), in a study of Ghana, also found scope for capital/labour substitution and could 
find no conclusive evidence that foreign firms are more capital-intensive than resident expatriate 
or private indigenous firms. The situation varies from industry to industry. Helleiner (1975) con-
cludes his survey of multinational corporations and technological choice by saying:
In particular industrial sectors, the multinational firm has often proven more responsive and 
adaptable in its factor and input use, especially in the ancillary activities associated with the 
basic production processes, than local firms, and so it perhaps should be with its wide range 
of experience on which to draw.
Even if more labour-intensive techniques can be used without a sacrifice of output, there is 
still the question of whether the investible surplus, and therefore future output, will be impaired. 
Pack’s work suggests otherwise, but let us now consider in more detail the potential conflict 
between employment and saving, as the traditional argument has it.
Employment versus saving
The potential conflict between employment and saving can be illustrated in its starkest form 
using a simple production function diagram, first used in this context by Dobb (1955) and 
Sen (1968).
Consider the use of a given amount of investible resources, K, and the possibility of employ-
ing those resources with varying amounts of labour to produce output. In Figure 6.7, 0O is 
the production function in the consumption sector, exhibiting diminishing returns to labour. 
Now take the standard traditional (although not necessarily correct) assumption that in the 
industrial sector, labour is paid a fixed wage that is all consumed, so that a ray from the origin 
(0C) with a constant slope (w) shows the level of the wage bill and consumption at each level 
of employment. The difference between 0O and 0C is profit, and if all profits are saved, the dif-
ference also shows the level of saving at each capital–labour ratio. Saving is maximized where 
a line drawn parallel to 0C is tangential to the production function – at employment level L in 
Figure 6.7. Beyond this point, further employment generation would diminish the level of sav-
ing and investible surplus.
The potential clash between increasing employment and maximizing saving can be seen, how-
ever, to be based on several assumptions, the validity of which may be questioned:
203
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
•
• The wage rate is given and invariant with respect to the technique of production. This assump-
tion would seem to be a hangover from Lewis’s influential model of the development process 
(discussed in Chapter 5), which assumes an elastic supply of labour to the industrial sector at a 
constant wage. If this wage is above the minimum necessary, several other implications ensue.
•
• All profits are saved and all wages are consumed.
•
• Unemployment resulting from the use of capital-intensive techniques does not reduce com-
munity saving by at least as much as with more employment and a higher wage bill.
•
• Consumption is not productive (that is, it has no investment component), or that present con-
sumption is no more productive than future consumption.
•
• Governments lack the ability to tax and to subsidize labour to reconcile the potential conflict.
Let us relax these assumptions and see what difference is made.
Wages and the capital intensity of production
Let us first relax the assumption that the wage rate is given and the same for all techniques, 
regardless of capital intensity. There are two fundamental points to be made here in the context 
of a developing country. The first is that a great deal of the technology, at least in the modern 
industrial sector, is not indigenous but imported. In this case, the wage structure is set by the 
skill mix demanded by the technology and the need to keep the labour force well nourished and 
contented if the capital equipment is to be worked productively and profitably. By and large it 
may be expected that the greater the degree of capital intensity, the higher the average wage paid.
The second point is that with large amounts of disguised and open unemployment in the 
urban sector of developing countries, there is likely to be a big difference between the wage that 
is being paid with the use of existing technology (imported or indigenous) and the wage at which 
labour would be willing to work, given the opportunity, with the use of more labour-intensive 
technology. If more labour-intensive technology could be developed and applied, there is no rea-
son why the wage rate should not be lower with the use of these techniques, unless there is strong 
trade union resistance in certain sectors.
If the wage is not assumed to be given, but may vary with the technique of production for the 
reasons outlined above, the conclusion of a conflict between employment and saving in the choice 
of new techniques is affected considerably. Indeed, if the marginal product of labour declines with 
the labour intensity of production, and the wage is equal to the marginal ­
product, the conflict 
O
C = wL
0
Labour
Output
Capital
x
x
L
K
L1
Figure 6.7  Employment versus saving
204
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
disappears entirely. The surplus increases in line with increases in the amount of employment 
because the surplus on intra-marginal units of labour increases.
Wages cannot fall to zero, however – there must be some minimum below which wages can-
not fall. This gives the conclusion that there is no necessary conflict between employment and 
saving up to the point where the marginal product equals the minimum wage. Beyond that point 
there will be a conflict.
Different classes’ propensity to consume
The alleged conflict between employment and saving also depends on the assumption that the 
propensity to save out of profits is higher than the propensity to save out of wages. In Figure 6.7 
above, the difference between employment levels L (which maximizes saving) and L1 (which maxi-
mizes employment) depends on the extreme assumption that all profits are saved and all wages 
are spent. No one would dispute that the propensity to save out of profits (sp) is higher than the 
propensity to save out of wages (sw) (indeed, there is plenty of empirical evidence to support the 
assertion), but it would be unrealistic to argue that there is no saving out of wages and no consump-
tion out of profits. Both consumption out of profits and saving out of wages will reduce the conflict 
between employment and saving and move the point of maximum surplus away from L towards L1.
The narrower the difference between sw and sp, the higher the level of employment before a 
conflict sets in, until at the limit, if sw 5 sp, there is no conflict at all. The distribution of income 
between wages and profits will not affect the aggregate level of saving.
Support of the unemployed
If a particular choice of technology, which is designed to maximize the reinvestible surplus, causes 
unemployment and the unemployed make claims on society’s investible resources, the surplus 
may ultimately be less than if more labour-intensive techniques had been chosen. There are three 
main ways in which the unemployed may reduce the investible surplus:
•
• If the unemployed remain in the agricultural sector, they may depress average product and 
consume more than they produce, thus reducing the agricultural surplus.
•
• If the unemployed remain in the industrial sector, they will absorb family savings to support 
themselves.
•
• There may be public support for the unemployed through unemployment insurance pro-
grammes, in which case, public saving will be reduced below what it otherwise might be.
If ‘compensation’ to the unemployed in any of the forms outlined above exceeds the difference 
between the industrial wage and the marginal product using more labour-intensive techniques, 
it would pay to create extra employment because the difference between consumption and pro-
duction as a result of expanding employment would be less than the reduction in saving caused by 
the unemployment. At the limit, of course, if the unemployed ‘consumed’ resources equal to the 
value of the industrial wage, it would make no difference if labour was employed up to the point 
where the marginal product of labour is zero. There is clearly no difference from the point of view 
of saving between an unemployed person consuming the equivalent of an industrial wage and an 
employed man with zero marginal product receiving an industrial wage. As long as unemploy-
ment absorbs saving, therefore, in whatever form, employment can be higher without reducing 
the investible surplus to below what it would otherwise have been. Thus, as a general proposition, 
it may be said that the extent of the conflict between employment and saving will also depend on 
the amount of compensation to the unemployed out of the total investible surplus.
205
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
Are consumption and investment distinct?
The alleged conflict between employment and saving also assumes either that consumption has 
no investment component or that present and future consumption are equally productive. Those 
who argue for techniques to maximize the investible surplus at the expense of employment place 
no value on present consumption at the margin, and those who argue for techniques to maxi-
mize employment are indifferent at the margin between an extra unit of consumption and saving 
(investment). It can be shown, however, that if consumption has an investment content, and the 
productivity of consumption falls as the level of consumption increases, the relative valuation 
of present consumption increases, favouring more labour-intensive techniques (Thirlwall, 1977). 
‘Productive’ consumption refers to consumption that improves the efficiency of labour, thereby 
raising the level of income in the same way as normal additions to the capital stock. As long as 
consumption is productive, therefore, an increase in employment and consumption need not be 
at the expense of ‘investment’ for future output.
All too little is known about the precise extent to which low levels of consumption, and par-
ticularly food intake, impair working efficiency and productivity. But we do know that the food 
requirements considered by nutritionists to be necessary for efficient working and healthy living 
are far greater than the levels achieved by a large minority of the population in developing coun-
tries (see Dasgupta, 1993). Calorie deficiency causes loss of body weight, tiredness, listlessness 
and a deterioration of mental faculties. Protein deficiency causes such conditions as kwashiorkor, 
and may cause death in children. Vitamin A deficiency causes blindness, and iodine deficiency 
is a cause of goitre, which leads to cretinism and deaf-mutism. Altogether, it has been estimated 
by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization that at least 1 billion people in the world suffer 
from various degrees of malnutrition. To the extent that this impairs efficiency and output, and is 
caused by a lack of consumption, an increase in employment and present consumption may be 
as valuable at the margin as an extra unit of saving from the point of view of future welfare. The 
more equal the relative valuation of consumption and saving at the margin, the less the conflict 
between employment generation in the present and the level of future output.
Taxes and subsidies
It has been assumed so far that savings and employment depend exclusively on the choice of tech-
nique. In practice, of course, governments can tax and subsidize to achieve desired ends, and this 
they can do to reconcile the conflict between employment and saving. As Sen (1969) has remarked:
the total amount of income to be saved can be determined by the planner in any way he likes . . . 
If this is true then the link snaps between the choice of techniques and the proportion of income 
saved. The technical choice may be made with the main purpose of maximising the amount of 
output, and the proportion of the output to be invested can be decided at a separate stage.
Consider again Figure 6.7, which is redrawn here as Figure 6.8. By the choice of techniques alone, 
maximization of the surplus XY means a sacrifice of employment L1L. Or employment L1 means a 
sacrifice of savings equal to Y1Y2. Now suppose that the government possesses the power to tax 
and subsidize. To employ L1 requires a shadow wage of zero: that is, a subsidy to employers equal 
to the full value of the wage. The employers’ surplus will now be X1L1, but since workers receive 
the market wage and all wages are consumed, consumption will still be Y1L1, and the investible 
surplus, X1Y1. The question is: Can tax policy in the new situation preserve the level of the surplus 
XY generated by the more capital-intensive technology? The answer must be yes, ­
provided the 
206
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
propensity to consume is greater than zero. The total wage bill is Y1L1 and it is desired to reduce 
consumption out of the wage bill by Y1Y2. Consumption will fall by the amount of tax times the 
propensity to consume (c). Hence, the level of tax raised must be T 5 (Y1Y2)/c. If the wage bill is, 
say, £1,000, Y1Y2 is £100 and c is 0.8, then the tax raised must be £100/0.8 5 £125.
In this example, the preservation of the level of saving is quite easily accomplished while mov-
ing from the more capital-intensive to labour-intensive techniques. If, of course, a fairly high level 
of taxation already exists, and there is no scope for further taxation, subsidization and taxation 
will not be a feasible means of reconciliation. In practice, however, the presumption must be that 
developing countries are not yet at their taxable capacity, and that the subsidization of labour, 
coupled with appropriate tax policy, is a possible policy.
Some care must be taken, however, over the form of taxation. For example, if the wage is fixed 
in real terms, then indirect taxes that raise prices will reduce the real wage, and the money wage 
will have to rise to compensate. Since the money wage is the cost to the employer, subsidies will 
then have to be increased. The imposition of indirect taxes to finance subsidies may lead to a spiral 
 
of increased taxation, inflation and subsidization. Direct taxes on workers’ incomes may also be 
counterproductive if workers bid for money wage increases to maintain disposable income. The 
only feasible taxes to finance subsidies may be on exports or luxury consumption goods, which 
will not affect the real income of the broad mass of the population. While theoretically, therefore, 
a policy of labour subsidization financed by taxation may reconcile the conflict between employ-
ment and saving, it may run into a number of practical difficulties.
All the factors that may lead to an increase in the labour intensity of production without 
impairing the investible surplus may either be thought of as additive, or any one of them by itself 
may be powerful enough to push employment close to L1 in Figure 6.7 above without loss of sav-
ing or its benefits.
Future policy
It has become part of conventional wisdom, and there may be a good deal of truth in the asser-
tion, that a major cause of the growth of urban unemployment in developing countries lies in the 
application of ‘inappropriate’ production techniques because of the limited choice of techniques 
O
C = wL
0
Labour
Output
Capital
Y
L
K
L1
Y1
X1
X
Y2
Figure 6.8  Preserving the level of saving through taxation
207
6  •  C A P I TA L  A C C U M U L AT I O N  A N D  T E C H N I C A L  P R O G R E S S
available, from within the countries and from outside. The choice is limited from within owing 
to the absence of a domestic capital goods sector, and it is limited from without because the 
techniques imported reflect the labour-saving bias of technical progress in the developed coun-
tries from which they come. The application of ‘inappropriate’ technology not only exacerbates 
unemployment, but perpetuates the dualistic structure of developing countries, increases income 
in­
equality, may worsen the foreign exchange position, and, in general, produces a distorted 
 
economy, while increasing the dependence of developing countries on developed countries.
There is now a strong movement throughout the developing countries in support of the cre­
ation of an intermediate technology using more labour per unit of capital and fewer foreign inputs. 
What is required is a whole spectrum of techniques to suit different circumstances, from which 
developing countries can choose. For this to happen, developing countries need to encourage 
 
the establishment of their own capital goods industries, and more R&D is required both within, 
and on behalf of, poor countries. An international technology bank would be a useful starting 
point, giving countries access to technological blueprints from different sources.
The capital intensity of production is also a function of the composition of output. There are 
often many ways of meeting a given need, some of which may be more labour-intensive than oth-
ers. Where this is so, such as in transport, nutrition, housing and so on, serious consideration should 
be given to the most labour-intensive way of meeting such needs, consistent with other objectives.
Finally, the location of activity needs to be considered. Whatever technology is applied in the 
modern sector, it will have implications for the rural sector that will rebound on the modern 
sector. We saw in Chapter 5 that the creation of more modern sector jobs may encourage more 
migrants than the number of jobs created, thus increasing urban unemployment. This would 
seem to call for the location of new labour-intensive industries in the rural sector, to curb the flow 
of migrants and ease urban unemployment.
To conclude our analysis, we have seen that there are many reasons for believing that the 
potential conflicts inherent in the choice of new techniques between employment and saving on 
the one hand and between employment and output on the other have been exaggerated, and 
that techniques can be more labour-intensive without impairing the level of the investible surplus 
or the level of output. It is in the direction of more rural-based, labour-intensive projects that 
development strategy ought to move for the maximization of general welfare.
Summary
•
• There can be no economic growth unless economies invest a proportion of their output. The 
amount of capital per worker in developing countries is much lower than in developed coun-
tries, which partly accounts for the lower productivity of labour in developing countries.
•
• There are many different types of capital: physical plant and machinery, infrastructure, human 
capital and social capital, including health expenditure, which makes labour more productive 
(see Chapter 7).
•
• The productivity of capital depends to a large extent on the amount of technical progress em-
bodied in it.
•
• The pace of technical progress depends on the willingness and capacity of societies to be 
invent­
ive, to innovate, and to devote resources to human capital formation, skills training and 
R&D expenditure.
•
• There is a huge technological divide between rich and poor countries, which will take time and 
effort to bridge.
208
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
•
• The choice of techniques of production is an important issue in developing countries – ­
whether 
to choose relatively labour-intensive techniques to create more employment, or relatively 
­
capital-intensive techniques, which embody more technology.
•
• Theory and evidence suggests that developing countries can move towards the use of more 
labour-intensive technologies without sacrificing future growth.
1.	 What is meant by the process of capital accumulation?
2.	 Distinguish between the various forms of investment and capital accumulation 
that can raise per capita income.
3.	 Why do developing countries, and many development economists, lay great stress 
on the role of capital accumulation in the development process?
4.	 What is meant by the following terms: neutral, capital-saving, and labour-saving 
technical progress?
5.	 What are the main means by which societies progress technologically?
6.	 What is ‘learning by doing’?
7.	 In what sense is infrastructure investment complementary to investment in plant 
and machinery, and does it have to be provided publicly?
8.	 What are the major factors that dictate the choice of techniques in the industrial 
sector in developing countries?
9.	 Why did early development theory tend to stress the importance of capital-­
intensive techniques for rapid economic development?
10.	 Would the use of more labour-intensive techniques necessarily reduce the size of 
the investible surplus?
11.	 What do you understand by the ‘efficiency wage’ of labour, and how does this con-
cept help to explain the relative capital intensity of production and goods traded?
Discussion questions
Chapter 6
Note
1.  The capital–output ratio (K/O) may be expressed as the product of the capital–labour ratio and 
labour requirements per unit of output, that is, K/O 5 (K/L)(L/O). Techniques with a low K/L may 
nonetheless have a high K/O because L/O is high – that is, the productivity of labour is low.
Websites on technology and investment
Economic Growth Resources run by Jon Temple, Bristol University, UK www.bristol.ac.uk/efm/people/
jon-r-temple/overview.html
International Institute for Communication www.iicd.org
World Intellectual Property Organization www.wipo.int
United Nations Industrial Development Organization www.unido.org
