FINANCING ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT
IV
This is a Blank Page
365
•
• Introduction
•
• Forms of saving
•
• The prior savings approach
•
• The capacity to save
•
• The willingness to save
•
• Financial systems and economic 
development
•
• The informal financial sector
•
• Monetization and money 
market integration
•
• Developing a banking system
•
• Rural financial intermediaries 
and microcredit
•
• Development banks
•
• Financial intermediaries
•
• Financial liberalization
•
• Fiscal policy and taxation
•
• Tax reform in developing 
countries
•
• Inflation, saving and growth
•
• The Keynesian approach to the 
financing of development
•
• Reconciling the prior saving and 
forced saving approaches to 
development
•
• The quantity theory approach 
to the financing of development
•
• The dangers of inflation
•
• Inflation targeting
•
• Inflation and growth: the 
empirical evidence
•
• The inflationary experience
•
• The structuralist–monetarist 
debate in Latin America
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Notes
•
• Websites on banking and 
finance
FINANCING ­
DEVELOPMENT 
FROM DOMESTIC 
­
RESOURCES
13
366
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Introduction
The topic of financing development from domestic resources has two major aspects. The first 
concerns the ways in which savings can be encouraged in developing countries, because only if 
society is willing to save can resources be devoted to the production of capital goods. Saving is 
necessary to fund investment. In a primitive subsistence economy, without money or monetary 
assets, saving and investment will tend to be simultaneous acts, in the sense that saving and 
investment will be done by the same people, and saving will be invested in the sector in which 
the saving takes place. In a more sophisticated money exchange economy, however, there is no 
guarantee that saving will necessarily be converted into investment. With the existence of money 
and monetary assets, the act of saving becomes divorced from the act of investing. Those who 
want to do the investing may be different from those who want to do the saving, and the pro-
cess of capital accumulation is likely to require financial and credit mechanisms to ‘redistribute’ 
resources from savers to investors. Indeed, with a banking system with the power to create credit, 
investment can take place without prior saving through the process of borrowing. In other words, 
saving funds investment, but does not necessarily finance it. Investment generates its own saving 
through increases in output and profits. In fact, in the early stages of development, savings may 
not be the major barrier to capital formation but rather an unwillingness or inability to invest.
Unwillingness to invest may stem from cultural attitudes or simply from a realistic assessment 
of the risks involved. In Chapter 5, we analysed why poor people may be risk-averse. The inabil-
ity to invest, on the other hand, may result from shortages of cooperating factors of production 
(including foreign exchange), or lack of access to credit because of the underdeveloped state 
of the financial system. The second important aspect of financing development from domestic 
resources, therefore, has to do with the role of the banking and financial system in promoting 
and financing investment. The financial system is important for encouraging saving, financing 
investment and allocating savings in the most productive manner.
This chapter starts by distinguishing the different types of saving – voluntary, involuntary and 
forced – and then distinguishes the different analytical approaches to the finance of development, 
which have different policy implications. The prior savings approach focuses on policies to raise 
the level of voluntary and involuntary saving as a prerequisite for investment. The Keynesian 
approach focuses on incentives to investment that will generate its own saving. The quantity 
theory approach emphasizes the role of government in appropriating resources for development 
through monetary expansion and forced saving through inflation (the inflation tax).
Raising the level of voluntary and involuntary saving involves the use of monetary and fiscal 
policy. The chapter discusses the financial systems of developing countries, including the informal 
financial sector, which dominates in rural areas; the formal banking system and financial inter­
mediaries, and the various forms of financial repression that exist, which, in recent years, have led 
to extensive programmes of financial liberalization. The case for and against financial liberaliza-
tion, and the empirical evidence, is presented. The role of microcredit and development banks in 
helping people out of poverty is also examined.
We then consider fiscal policy and taxation, the tax effort of countries, and the need for fiscal 
reform to raise tax revenue as a proportion of GDP.
If voluntary and involuntary saving are inadequate for the development effort, inflationary 
policies that redistribute income between wages and profits, and between the private sector and 
the government, are alternative possibilities. The former possibility is the Keynesian approach to 
the finance of development, which argues that stimulating investment can generate its own sav-
ing by raising the level of income if the economy is operating below capacity, and by redistributing 
367
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
income from wage earners with a low propensity to save to profit earners with a higher propensity 
to save if the economy is working at full capacity.
The latter possibility is the quantity theory approach to the finance of development (so named 
after the quantity theory of money). One of the ways a government can divert more resources to 
investment is to invest on society’s behalf, financing the investment by expanding the money sup-
ply. At full employment, monetary expansion will be inflationary. The ‘tax’ on money consists of 
a reduction in the real purchasing power of money, and the real resources that holders of money 
must forgo to restore the real value of their money holdings (forced saving).
The dangers of inflationary finance are recognized, and the extensive empirical research on the 
relation between inflation and growth is evaluated.
Forms of saving
There are three broad groups in society that save: the household sector, the business sector and the 
government. The household sector saves out of personal disposable income (personal saving), the 
business sector saves out of profits, and the government can save out of tax revenues if it spends 
less than it receives (that is, runs a budget surplus on current account). Household and business 
saving is sometimes referred to as private saving, while government saving is public saving. Each 
of the sectors’ motives for saving will differ, and we shall consider the determinants of saving later 
in this chapter.
As far as the nature of saving is concerned, three broad types may be distinguished: voluntary, 
involuntary and ‘forced’. The nature of these types of saving is fairly self-explanatory:
•
• Voluntary savings are savings that arise through voluntary reductions in consumption out of 
disposable income. Both the household and the business sector may be a source of voluntary 
savings.
•
• Involuntary savings are savings brought about through involuntary reductions in consump-
tion. All forms of taxation, social insurance contributions and schemes for compulsory lending 
to governments are traditional measures involving involuntary reductions in consumption.
•
• Forced saving is when consumption may be reduced because of rising prices (some inflation-
induced saving may be voluntary, some involuntary), which may happen for a number of rea-
sons. People may spend the same amount in money terms, but because prices have risen, this 
means they spend less in real terms (money illusion). People may want to keep the real value 
of their holdings of money constant, so they accumulate more money as prices rise – the real 
balance effect. Also, inflation may redistribute income to those with a higher propensity to 
save, such as profit earners.
For a variety of reasons, which will be considered below, inflation is likely to be a natural con-
comitant of development, but it can also be deliberately induced by governments financing 
budget deficits at full employment by monetary expansion. This is the idea of inflation as a tax 
on money. It should also be remembered that if an economy is at less than full employment, there 
can always be more saving by activating unemployed or underemployed resources, provided not 
all the increase in output is consumed.
Domestic savings for investment can also be supplemented from abroad. Private foreign 
investment is a direct source of capital formation and provides a direct addition to domestic 
investment. It can also be a source of savings by stimulating income and employing previously 
underutilized resources. Borrowing from abroad also provides resources for investment by 
368
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
­
enabling imports to exceed exports, which shows up as investment in excess of domestic saving 
in the national accounts. Foreign assistance may be from multilateral or bilateral sources and 
may take a variety of forms, ranging from loans at commercial rates of interest to outright gifts of 
goods and services and technical assistance (see Chapter 14). Remittances from abroad also aug-
ment domestic saving.
Finally, a country’s commercial policy can stimulate savings and release resources for invest-
ment purposes. Trade itself, and an improvement in a country’s terms of trade, can provide addi-
tional resources for investment if the resulting increase in real income is not fully consumed. 
Likewise, policies to restrict imports of consumption goods can release additional resources for 
investment, provided that domestic saving is not reduced by the purchasing power released being 
switched to home consumption goods.
The amount that countries save and invest as a proportion of their gross domestic product 
(GDP) differs enormously, affected by differences in the ability and willingness to save and invest. 
Some countries dissave, consuming more than they produce. Some countries save more than 
they invest domestically, which means they are investing abroad, and other countries invest more 
than they save, which means they are net importers of capital. The experience in different areas 
(contin­
ents) of the world is shown in Table 13.1. The first thing to notice is that the savings ratio 
is much lower in low-income countries than in richer countries, but the savings ratio does not 
continue to rise for ever as countries grow richer. The ratio peaks in the upper middle-income 
countries and then declines. The weighted average savings ratio in low-income countries is 16% of 
GDP compared with 31% in middle-income countries and 21% in high-income countries.
The second important observation is the enormous disparity in savings performance between 
continents, particularly between the high savings ratios of the highly successful East Asian and 
Pacific countries (which include China) and the much lower savings ratios in the less successful 
economies of Latin America, the Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa. The ratio in East Asia and 
Table 13.1  Investment and savings as a percentage of GDP
Gross capital 
formation  
% of GDP  
2014
Gross savings  
% of GDP  
2014
Low income
28
16
Middle income
31
31
Lower middle income
27
29
Upper middle income
32
32
Low and middle income
31
31
East Asia and Pacific
42
45
Europe and Central Asia
21
16
Latin America and Caribbean
21
18
Middle East and North Africa
30
..
South Asia
30
31
Sub-Saharan Africa
22
16
High income
20
21
Source: World Bank, 2015.
369
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
Pacific (45%) is more than double that of Latin America and the Caribbean (18%) and nearly triple 
that of sub-Saharan Africa (16%). The question that naturally arises is: Did high savings precede 
rapid growth in East Asia, or did rapid growth generate its own high savings ratio? Some might 
argue that it was policies to stimulate saving that were important, including financial liberaliza-
tion. Some might say it was policies to stimulate investment, partly through control of the bank-
ing system, that generated growth and therefore saving. Others might say it was the deliberate 
involvement of the government in generating and reallocating new resources.
There is no easy answer to the question, but the different replies that might be given highlight 
the differences in the three broad analytical approaches to the study of financing development 
from domestic resources, which we will use as the organizing framework for the rest of the chapter. 
The three approaches are as follows:
•
• The prior savings approach to the financing of development, which stresses the importance 
of prior savings for investment and the need for policies to raise the level of savings either vol-
untarily, involuntarily, or both. The approach is classical in conception, emphasizing saving as a 
prerequisite of investment. The approach is also characterized by a strong aversion to inflation 
and a belief that saving will readily find investment outlets.
•
• The Keynesian approach, which rejects the idea that saving determines investment and argues 
instead that the encouragement of investment will generate its own saving, either through in-
creases in output if resources are unemployed, or through income redistribution from groups 
with a low propensity to save to groups with a higher propensity to save as a result of inflation 
if resources are fully employed.
•
• The quantity theory approach, which emphasizes the role of government monetary expansion 
in appropriating resources for development through forced saving or the inflation tax. (The ap-
proach gets its name from the quantity theory of money, which predicts that increases in the 
quantity of money will always lead eventually to increases in the price level.)
If developing countries are characterized as fully employed in the Keynesian sense (with no spare 
capacity in the consumption goods industries), both the Keynesian and the quantity theory approach 
to the financing of development will involve inflation. Plans to invest in excess of plans to save at full 
employment will drive up the price level, and so will monetary expansion by government. In this sense, 
there is an important practical, as well as a theoretical, difference between the prior savings approach 
and the other two approaches. In the prior savings approach, the resources released for investment 
come from voluntary and involuntary saving and no inflation is involved. In the Keynesian and quan-
tity theory approaches, the resources are partly released through the process of inflation, by income 
redistribution from classes with low propensities to save to those with higher propensities to save, and 
by inflation as a ‘tax’ on money, which redistributes resources to government.
The prior savings approach
In classical theory, saving and investment are one and the same thing. All saving finds investment 
outlets through variations in the rate of interest. Investment and the development process are led 
by savings. It is this classical view of the development process that underlies such phrases in the 
development literature as the ‘mobilization of savings for development’, and also underlies the 
policy recommendation of high real interest rates to encourage voluntary saving. Lewis’s influen-
tial classical model of the development process, which was considered in Chapter 5, stresses the 
importance for development of reinvesting the capitalist surplus.
370
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
The level of saving and the ratio of saving to national income in developing countries are likely 
to be a function of many variables affecting the ability and willingness to save. The main deter-
minants of the capacity or ability to save are the average level of per capita income, the rate of 
growth of income, the distribution of income between rich and poor, and the age composition of 
the population (or dependency ratio). In turn, the willingness to save depends mainly on mon-
etary factors, such as the rate of interest, the range and availability of financial institutions and 
assets (financial deepening), and the rate of inflation. Differences in cultural attitudes towards 
saving may also be important, but are not easily measured.
The capacity to save
Income is the major determinant of the capacity or the ability to save. It was Keynes who first 
introduced into economics the idea of the consumption function (and therefore savings func-
tion), making consumption and saving primarily a function of income rather than a function 
of the rate of interest, as in classical theory. Saving as a function of income is known as the 
Keynesian absolute income hypothesis. We can derive the savings ratio as a function of the level 
of per capita income (PCY) in the following way. If we write the Keynesian savings function as 
 
S 5 -a0 1 b0(Y), where b0 is the marginal propensity to save and -a0 represents dissaving (or 
positive ­
consumption) when income is zero, and divide by the population level (P), we have:
S/P 52 a11 b1(Y/P)
(13.1)
Then, to obtain an expression for the savings ratio, multiply equation (13.1) by P and divide by Y:
S/Y5 b12 a1(Y/P)21
(13.2)
The Keynesian absolute income hypothesis therefore predicts that savings per head (S/P) is a 
linear (but non-proportional) function of income per head (Y/P), and that the savings ratio (S/Y) 
is a hyperbolic function of the level of income per head; that is, the savings ratio will rise with the 
level of PCY but at a decreasing rate. As Y/P S `, S/Y S  to the asymptote b1. This is shown in 
Figure 13.1.
The data on the savings ratio in Table 13.1 above suggest this type of relation, as already dis-
cussed. The savings ratio is lower in poor countries than in richer countries, but the ratio does not 
continue rising linearly (for ever) as PCY rises. It increases at a diminishing rate and then levels off. 
0
Savings ratio (S/Y)
Per capita income (Y/P)
b1
Figure 13.1  The Keynesian absolute income hypothesis
371
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
Indeed, there is even some indication that it starts falling at high levels of income, as we shall see 
when we come to examine the empirical evidence.
The reason why the savings ratio should rise as PCY increases and then level off is not clear-cut. 
It is as if saving is a luxury good in the early stages of development but then loses its appeal. Part 
of the reason may be purely ‘statistical’, arising from the way saving is normally defined in devel-
oping countries as the difference between investment and foreign capital inflows. As investment 
expenditure becomes more faithfully and accurately recorded as development proceeds (as per 
capita income rises), the savings ratio is also shown to increase. But there are also a number of 
 
economic factors that probably play a contributory role in explaining the relation. One is the 
growth of the money economy. As money replaces barter for transactions, the public will wish 
to hold a higher proportion of their income in the form of money, which they can only do by 
redu­
cing consumption as a proportion of income. This hypothesis is supported by what we know 
about the income elasticity of demand for money in developing countries, which exceeds unity.
A second possible explanation is that population growth decreases with increases in the 
level of per capita income, so that population growth absorbs household saving to a lesser 
and lesser extent. Another plausible hypothesis is that in the early stages of development, the 
distribution of income, both personal and functional, grows more unequal but at a decreas-
ing rate. If higher income groups have higher propensities to save than lower income groups, 
and profit earners have a higher propensity to save than wage earners, the savings ratio will 
be positively related to the degree of inequality in income distribution (personal income dis-
tribution) and to the share of profits in total income (functional income distribution). Some 
evidence of the widening distribution of income in the early stages of development was given 
in Chapter 3.
A second major determinant of the capacity of a country to save is the growth of income, as 
suggested by the life-cycle hypothesis of saving. The basis of the hypothesis, as originally formu-
lated by Modigliani and Brumberg (1954), is that individuals and households attempt to spread 
out consumption evenly over their lifetime so that decisions to save are assumed to be a func-
tion of total lifetime earnings and the stage reached in the earnings cycle. A typical pattern of 
behaviour would be dissaving in youth, positive saving in middle age and dissaving in retirement. 
Consider now the effect of income growth within this framework. If income is rising over time, 
this means that the life earnings and consumption of each successive age group will be higher 
than the preceding one. If each successive age group is aiming for a higher level of consumption 
in retirement, the volume of saving of active households will exceed the dissaving of the currently 
retired households with a lower level of lifetime consumption. The saving ratio will then tend to 
rise with the rate of growth of income because the higher the growth rate, the greater the gap 
between the target future consumption level of the current generation of working households 
and the dissaving of retired people from a less prosperous generation. Thus, countries with higher 
growth rates might be expected to have at least higher personal savings ratios than countries with 
lower growth rates.
But income growth comprises two components: the growth of income per head (PCY) and 
the growth of population. Income growth due to population growth will affect the savings ratio 
according to how population growth affects the ratio of active to non-active households. Thus, 
a third major determinant of the savings ratio is the dependency ratio. If population growth 
rises suddenly, this will lead to a higher ratio of young dependents who consume but do not pro-
duce, and this will tend to reduce saving. Equally, however, if population growth slows for a long 
period, this will lead to a higher ratio of retired people, who also consume but do not produce. 
Thus, both high and low population growth may be associated with a high dependency ratio and 
 
372
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
a low savings ratio. To test the life-cycle hypothesis of saving, it is best to relate the savings ratio to 
the growth of per capita income and include the age structure of the population, or dependency 
ratio, as a separate variable (see Hussein and Thirlwall, 1999).
Finally, we have already mentioned the distribution of income as a determinant of the 
capacity to save. If the propensity to save of the rich is higher than that of the poor, the aggre-
gate savings ratio will be positively related to the degree of inequality in personal income dis-
tribution (between individuals) and functional distribution (between wages and profits), on 
the assumption that the propensity to save out of profits is higher than out of wages. It will 
be remembered from Chapter 5 that in Lewis’s model of development with unlimited supplies 
of labour, it is not the absolute level of per capita income that is the prime determinant of 
the savings ratio but the size of the capitalist surplus and the distribution of income between 
entrepreneurial profits and other income. According to Lewis (1955): ‘if we ask why the less 
developed countries save so little the answer is not because they are so poor but because their 
capitalist sector is so small’.
Empirical studies
Let us consider four major studies of the determinants of saving across countries, which 
include all or some of the variables discussed above, and also other variables measuring 
the willingness to save that we will discuss below. These are Edwards (1996), Masson et al. 
(1998), Hussein and Thirlwall (1999) and Loayza et al. (2000). Edwards takes panel data for 36 
countries over the period 1970–92, distinguishing between private and government savings. 
Masson et al. use panel data for 21 developed countries (1971–93) and 40 less developed 
countries (1982–93) to explain the ratio of private saving to GDP. Hussein and Thirlwall take 
62 countries over the period 1967–95, taking the domestic savings ratio as the dependent 
variable. Finally, Loayza et al. use a dataset of 160 countries from 1964 to 1994, taking four 
different measures of private saving (all highly correlated). All the studies find the level and 
growth of per capita income highly significant as determinants of intercountry differences 
in the savings ratio. Masson et al. (1998) and Hussein and Thirlwall (1999) use a nonlinear 
specification for the level of PCY, as discussed above, and find it more significant than the 
linear specification, thus supporting the shape of the curve in Figure 13.1 above. Indeed, in 
the Masson et al. study, a quadratic term for PCY is used so that the savings ratio is first 
assumed to rise and then fall. For both developed and developing countries, the quadratic 
term turns out to be significantly negative, with the savings ratio peaking at 60% of the US 
level of PCY. The Loayza et al. (2000) study does separate analyses of developing countries 
and OECD countries and finds the impact of PCY on the savings ratio larger in developing 
countries than in developed countries, which is also evidence of nonlinearity. For the sample 
as a whole, Loayza et al. find that a 10% difference in PCY is associated with a 0.47 percent-
age point difference in the savings ratio. Loayza et al. (2000) conclude that ‘policies that spur 
development are an indirect but most effective way to raise saving’ and ‘successful growth 
policies may be able to set in motion a virtuous cycle of saving, capital accumulation and 
growth’. The question is how to get this cumulative process started of rising income, more 
saving and faster growth, leading to more saving. Monetary and fiscal policy, and the sophis-
tication of the financial system, are likely to play an important part in this process. This leads 
us on to the topic of the willingness to save and the role of the financial system in promoting 
saving and allocating resources in the most efficient manner. All the studies mentioned above 
include financial variables in their equations.
373
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
The willingness to save
Saving represents an intertemporal choice between consumption today and consumption tomor-
row. It might be expected, therefore, that the price of present consumption, namely the real rate 
of interest, will affect saving positively. The higher the rate of interest, the greater the amount of 
saving. This assumed positive relation also reflects the classical idea of the rate of interest as the 
reward for waiting, and lies behind the financial liberalization programmes in developing countries, 
which seek to raise the real interest rate in order to encourage saving, investment and growth. Since 
the 1970s, there has been extensive testing of the financial liberalization hypothesis, and the role 
of the interest rate, in promoting saving, with mixed and largely inconclusive results. Perhaps this 
is not surprising since the financial liberalization argument largely refers to financial saving, but 
financial saving is only one component of total saving. If interest rates rise, financial saving may 
rise but at the expense of other assets, leaving total saving unchanged (see Warman and Thirlwall, 
1994). It is also standard theory that any price change has both income and substitution effects. The 
substitution effect promotes saving, but the income effect reduces saving (because the same level 
of income can now be generated by less saving) and the two effects may cancel each other out.
Probably a more important determinant of the willingness to save is the existence of financial 
institutions and the range and availability of financial assets to suit savers. There is no single 
measure that can capture those institutional determinants of the willingness to save. The num-
ber, proximity and diversity of financial institutions serving the different needs of savers could be 
important. Equally, the volume and range of financial assets might matter as a measure of finan-
cial deepening. Such measures include money and quasi-money as a percentage of GDP, money 
and quasi-money growth, and quasi-liquid liabilities as a percentage of GDP. Domestic credit pro-
vided by the banking system as a percentage of GDP is also a measure of financial deepening, but 
its effect on saving is ambiguous. On the one hand, if bank credit finances investment and growth, 
this will have a positive effect on saving. On the other hand, an increase in bank credit will relax a 
liquidity constraint on consumption, resulting in a decline in saving.
Finally, the rate of inflation can be expected to affect the willingness to save, but the effect is 
ambiguous. On the one hand, inflation acts as a tax on money balance holdings. If individuals wish 
to restore the real value of their money balance holdings (the so-called real balance effect), saving 
will rise with the rate of inflation. On the other hand, it is natural to expect individuals to avoid 
the tax if it becomes burdensome in relation to the convenience of holding money. Even if private 
saving does increase, however, total saving may not increase if the government fully consumes the 
proceeds of the inflation tax. Inflation will also redistribute income from wages to profits within 
the private sector if the wage–price coefficient is less than unity. This will increase saving if the 
propensity to save out of profits is higher than out of wages (as discussed above), but this process 
can last only as long as there is money illusion and workers do not bid for wage increases to match 
price increases. The most likely relation between inflation and the savings ratio is an inverted 
U-shape (quadratic function) showing saving rising with mild inflation and then falling as inflation 
becomes excessive. This type of nonlinear relation is also suggested by the evidence available on 
the relation between inflation and growth (see later).
The evidence from the four studies cited above (and others) is that financial variables matter 
for the performance of saving, but financial deepening and credit availability are much more sig-
nificant than interest rates. Edwards (1996) and Masson et al. (1998) find that the level of financial 
development is an important determinant of private saving. Hussein and Thirlwall (1999) experi-
ment with different measures of financial deepening and find a strong positive relation between 
the domestic savings ratio of countries and the ratio of quasi-liquid liabilities of the banking 
 
374
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
system to GDP. Loayza et al. (2000) take the ratio of M2 money to GNP as a measure of financial 
deepening but find it only weakly significant. More interesting, they find that higher interest rates 
and larger private domestic credit flows exert a negative effect on the private savings ratio. Loayza 
et al. (2000) conclude that: ‘these results provide a bleaker view of the savings effects of financial 
liberalization than previous studies suggested’. The process and effects of financial liberalization 
are discussed later in this chapter.
The overall conclusion would be that while financial variables may not be as important as 
income variables in determining savings behaviour, economic development itself is dependent on 
the sophistication of the financial system, and there is evidence that saving may be more respon-
sive to interest rates when the level of income rises above subsistence. Research on this topic by 
Ogaki et al. (1996) is reported in Table 13.2.
It appears that saving is very unresponsive to interest rates in the very poorest low-income 
countries where there is little margin of income over subsistence needs, but its responsiveness 
increases as consumption rises above subsistence needs and people can exercise choice about 
increasing their present or future consumption.
This leads us to the extensive topic of financial systems, financial policy and economic 
development.
Financial systems and economic development
One of the characteristic features of developing countries is that quite large sections of the econ-
omy are either non-monetized or transactions take place outside the formal financial sector. In 
other words, the economies of developing countries have a large sector where money is not used 
as the primary means of exchange, as well as having a large informal financial sector or unorgan-
ized money market. This has a number of consequences that are not conducive to development:
•
• If transactions take the form of barter, this is costly in time and wasteful of resources. Sellers 
must spend time and effort finding buyers who have things they want. Money as a means of 
exchange avoids the problem of the double coincidence of wants. In this sense, money is a re-
source and its introduction and use in an economy can be highly productive.
Table 13.2  Interest sensitivity of saving
Initial real interest rate
Country groupings
3%
4%
5%
Low-income
Average for group
0.312
0.306
0.300
Average for 10 poorest
0.177
0.174
0.171
Lower middle-income
0.532
0.522
0.512
Upper middle-income
0.560
0.549
0.539
High-income
0.584
0.573
0.562
Note: The data refer to the change (in percentage points) in the saving rate owing to a 1 percentage point increase 
in the real interest rate. For example, in high-income countries with a real interest rate of 3%, a 1 percentage point 
rise in the real interest rate would raise the saving rate by nearly two-thirds of a percentage point (0.584 of a per-
centage point). At higher baseline levels of the real interest rate, the saving response diminishes slightly.
Source: Ogaki et al., 1996.
375
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
•
• Without a convenient and acceptable means of payment, the division of labour or specializa-
tion is impeded, which hinders the process of capital accumulation and reduces productivity. 
Remember that, for Adam Smith (see Chapter 4), it is the division of labour that is the source 
of increasing returns by allowing complex processes to be broken up into simpler operations 
that permit the use of machinery and mass production. Specialization is not worthwhile if the 
market is limited by the difficulty of exchanging goods.
•
• Saving takes the form of the acquisition of real assets as opposed to monetary assets, for ex-
ample land, cattle, gold, jewellery and so on, which absorb resources and may not be used 
productively.
•
• Without the existence of financial institutions issuing monetary assets, investment will tend to 
take place in the sector in which the saving takes place, and this may not be the most produc-
tive sector.
•
• Much of the lending in the informal sector is for consumption purposes and interest rates are 
very high, both of which can adversely affect total investment. The informal financial sector 
has an important role to play in the development process, but its integration with the formal 
financial sector is desirable for a number of reasons.
The informal financial sector
The informal financial sector refers to all institutions and transactions that take place outside a 
country’s authorized banking system. The sector plays a significant role in the financing of economic 
development, although exactly how significant no one really knows. Within the informal sector, 
there are a wide variety of institutions and multifarious arrangements between depositors, lenders 
and borrowers, some dating back for centuries, rooted in custom and tradition. Others are evolv-
ing constantly in response to changing economic and social conditions. The sector is characterized 
by a high degree of spontaneity and flexibility, with demand creating its own supply. The major 
participants are moneylenders, merchants, loan brokers, savings groups, and friends and relatives.
Moneylenders have a long tradition in the rural areas of developing countries. They may be 
landlords, merchants, shopkeepers and pawnbrokers. Loans are typically for short periods at high 
rates of interest, reflecting the scarcity of funds and the high demand for short-term loans to 
finance consumption and investment, for example the holding of stocks (inventories). Merchants 
often provide loans to clients based on the future sale or purchase of commodities (see Appendix 
to Chapter 5). Loan brokers act as intermediaries between agents who have surplus funds and 
those who require credit. The loans tend to be larger and the duration longer than for other sec-
tors in the informal market.
Savings groups take different forms and have different names in various countries, and are also 
important sources of finance and credit in rural areas. In some cases, the savings group consists 
of individuals who deposit money on a regular basis with a group leader or treasurer, sometimes 
for special purposes such as tax payments, investment or paying for festivities. If the savings are 
invested, the returns may be shared by the members. Rules and regulations are shaped by local 
conditions and traditions. In other cases, members of the savings group take turns to borrow the 
collected sums of money. One particular type of savings group with a long history in Africa is the 
‘rotating savings and credit association’, which operates like a miniature credit union based on the 
‘mutuality’ principle, whereby members of the association make a fixed contribution to the sav-
ings fund on a periodic basis and are entitled to withdraw money on a rotational basis. Individuals 
can decide on the cycle of payments and withdrawals that suit their needs. The advantage is that 
376
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
large expenditures can be undertaken by members sooner than if they had to rely on their own 
personal savings.
Rural financial intermediaries (RFIs), including microcredit institutions, have grown in 
importance in recent years, operating mainly in the rural sector to provide small, unsecured, 
short-term loans to individuals (mainly women), households and small entrepreneurs. These 
intermediaries are discussed in greater detail below.
Finally, friends and relatives are major providers of credit. The credit is flexible and interest-
free, and repayment is open-ended.
Despite the growth of the formal financial sector in the majority of developing countries, the 
informal financial sector continues to flourish because it fulfils needs that are not met elsewhere:
1.	 Many rural areas have no ready access to financial institutions, either because they are non­
existent or because they are not in the immediate vicinity. The formal financial sector is pre-
dominantly urban based.
2.	 Where banks do exist, there are a number of institutional barriers to their use, in the form of 
rules of procedure for obtaining financial assistance. The conditions for obtaining loans can be 
stringent and hard to satisfy for a number of people. It is difficult, for instance, for the poor and 
illiterate to provide collateral for loans, which is usually required by the formal sector. In prac-
tice, the formal financial sector tends to be out of reach of peasant farmers, small-scale entre-
preneurs and ordinary households, so the informal financial sector fills the gap in the market.
3.	 The informal sector sometimes acts as a complement to the formal sector. Individuals may 
borrow from the formal sector but find such credits inadequate and therefore resort to the 
informal sector to augment their borrowing. In recent years, the World Bank’s structural ad-
justment programmes, implemented in several countries, have reduced the flow of credit from 
the formal sector and demand has switched to the informal sector.
A well-developed financial system serving the whole community has five main requisites, each 
of which can contribute to the process of financial deepening, as well as raising the level of saving 
and investment, the productivity of capital and the growth of output:
•
• Full monetization of the economy and the replacement of barter as a means of exchange.
•
• Integration of the informal and formal money markets.
•
• Development of a commercial banking system with central bank supervision.
•
• The creation of development banks and microcredit facilities for small-scale borrowing.
•
• Development of financial markets and financial intermediaries, issuing and dealing in financial 
assets.
Monetization and money market integration
Monetization of an economy provides the potential to generate a real investible surplus in several 
ways. As fiat (paper) money replaces barter in transactions, the demand for money relative to 
income rises, which releases real resources of equivalent value. The increase in real saving is equal 
to the increase in the real stock of money held. The issuer of money can appropriate the released 
resources and increase the level of investment accordingly. In a growing economy, monetary 
expansion is also required to allow an increased volume of transactions to take place. Monetary 
expansion for this purpose can also be appropriated by governments for development purposes.
The increased use of money not only releases resources, but it also saves and generates 
resources. It saves resources by replacing barter objects, or commodity money, which may be 
377
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
costly to produce, with money that is virtually costless to produce. It also saves time – which is a 
resource if the marginal product of labour time is positive – by avoiding the double coincidence 
of wants necessitated by barter. Money generates resources by facilitating exchange and thereby 
permitting the greater division of labour (and specialization).
Historically, the growth of the money economy has also been a powerful stimulus to the devel-
opment of banking and credit mechanisms, which can themselves act as a stimulus to saving and 
investment. When the range of financial assets is narrow, saving tends to take the form of the 
acquisition of physical assets. While, in principle, this need not mean that the level of saving is 
reduced, in practice, it depends on how sellers of physical assets dispose of the sale proceeds. If a 
portion of the proceeds is consumed, the saving of one person is offset by the dissaving of another, 
and less resources are released for investment than if financial assets had been acquired, issued by 
financial institutions with an investment function.
For a number of reasons, there is also the need to promote links between the informal and 
formal financial sectors. The high interest rates charged in the informal sector add to costs and 
add to household debt, and these could be reduced if the informal sector was exposed to greater 
competition from the formal sector. This could be done by transforming informal institutions into 
more formal ones, or using the informal sector as a conduit for formal funds, taking advantage 
of the low transaction costs, local knowledge and greater flexibility in the informal sector. There 
could also be support mechanisms to guarantee loans from the informal sector.
It is also important that the capital market should be integrated, in the sense that the interest 
rate structure is unified. The consequence of a fragmented capital market, in which interest rates 
vary from one sector to another because of a lack of information and factor immobility, is that 
some sectors of the economy may be able to borrow funds far below the rate of interest prevailing 
in other sectors where the productivity of capital is higher. The allocation of capital is distorted 
and inefficient and the capital–output ratio is higher than it would otherwise be: the solution is to 
encourage funds into the organized money market, and extend the provision of financial institu-
tions into sectors of the economy that lack them.
Paradoxically (on a classical view of the world), development of the organized money market 
can lower average interest rates in the economy at large and raise the level of saving because the 
unorganized money market tends to charge higher interest rates and lends mainly for consump-
tion purposes, whereas in the organized money market, interest rates are lower and lending is 
more for investment purposes.
Developing a banking system
Developing a national banking system, comprising a central bank, a commercial banking system 
and special development banks, is one of the first priorities of development strategy. The func-
tions of a central bank include the following:
•
• Issuing currency and lending to government, whereby real resources are transferred to the gov-
ernment in the manner described earlier (with a strong central bank, it is much easier to give 
priority to government and public sector needs).
•
• Developing a fractional reserve banking system through which it can provide liquidity and control 
credit (a central bank can require member banks to hold reserves in government bonds, and the 
growth of the bond market itself can aid development without excessive monetary expansion).
•
• Developing other financial institutions, especially institutions that provide long-term loan finance 
for development, and a market for government securities.
378
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
•
• Maintaining a high level of demand, through the appropriate use of monetary policy, to achieve 
capacity growth.
•
• Applying selective credit controls when necessary, in the interests of developing particular sec-
tors of the economy.
The commercial banking system has two important functions: to create credit, and to encourage 
thrift and allocate saving in the most socially productive manner. The ability of an economic system 
to create credit is important for two main reasons. First, it can compensate for the failure of the eco-
nomic system to generate enough investment to match planned saving. Second, it provides the means 
by which growth is financed. This is the real significance of the invention of paper money and credit 
– permitting the economic system to expand in response to the continual opportunities for growth 
provided by technical progress, which a barter system or a purely metallic currency do not allow.
Banks can encourage thrift and allocate savings more productively than would otherwise be 
the case, by offering a return on savings and enabling savings to be used outside the sector in 
which they originate. Banks can help to break down sectoral bottlenecks and unify interest rates. 
But commercial banking is still rudimentary in many developing economies. The challenge for 
developing countries is to promote financial inclusion. Approximately 2 billion people in the 
world lack access to bank facilities, including 500 million in Asia. The ratio of bank deposits to 
national income averages approximately 30% and the proportion of demand deposits to the total 
money supply averages 40–50%. In developed countries, in contrast, the ratio of bank deposits 
to national income usually exceeds 50% and the money supply consists largely of the deposits of 
commercial banks. The number of banks relative to population size is also small. In developing 
countries as a whole, the average number of banks per million of the population is about 20 com-
pared with 200 in developed countries. Banks need to be numerous and dispersed if they are to 
act as catalysts for small savings. Figure 13.2 shows the financial access gap between high-income 
and low-income countries.
While high-income countries have 85 ATM machines per 100,000 adults and 45 branch banks, 
low-income countries have only 3 ATM machines and 6 branch banks. The case for branch ­
banking 
is that it can tap small savings. If savings institutions are near at hand, people will save more than if 
the nearest savings institution is some distance away. Case example 13.1 describes mobile banking 
in Vietnam, which is an example of microcredit, discussed in the next section.
100
Number per 100,000 adults
80
60
40
20
High-income
countries
Upper middle-
income countries
Lower middle-
income countries
Bank branches
ATMs
Low-income
countries
0
Figure 13.2  Financial access gap between high- and low-income countries, 2009
Source: Oshima and Chan, 2011.
379
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
Ma Seo Sang, a Hmong widow living on less than 25 cents a day in the mountainous 
region of Vietnam, needed help. She had sold a pig to pay for her husband’s funeral, 
paid a fine incurred by her son by selling one of her buffalo, and redeemed a debt with 
the other. She had borrowed all she could from relatives. Moneylenders, if they would 
even lend to her, would charge exorbitant interest (up to 10% per month). She needed 
money to survive.
Sang’s plight raises many issues related to extreme poverty, of which lack of access 
to credit is one. Part of the solution is microfinance – the provision of basic financial 
services to the poor. Microfinance can offer a path out of poverty. But how long is the 
path, and can it be shortened? Vietnam’s experiment with the mobile banking pro-
gramme under the World Bank’s Rural Finance Project provides a partial answer to 
those questions. It suggests that creative ways can be found not only for lenders to 
reach out to the poor but also for the poor to ‘reach in’ to lenders.
In 1998 the Vietnam Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (Agribank) ini-
tiated a mobile banking programme modelled after similar programmes in Bangla-
desh and Malaysia. It procured 159 vehicles equipped to travel on dirt roads and hilly 
pathways, enabling loan officers to reach remote areas to process loan applications, 
disburse money, collect payments, and mobilize savings deposits. The visits followed a 
fixed calendar and were announced in advance.
Once the programme was launched, it became clear that more than just difficult ac-
cess prevented the poorest from taking advantage of its services. Their isolation caused 
them to have feelings of helplessness and fear. In the upland ethnic group, the higher 
up a mountain people lived and the longer their isolation, the more they seemed to 
believe that they could not get credit. Suspicion was another issue. What if the lender 
offered a loan and then, if a payment were late, took a farmer’s buffalo, as had hap-
pened to Sang?
Above all, the poorest people lacked confidence and self-esteem. For example, the 
illiterate poor would wonder how they could fill in applications and receipts. Others 
felt they could do nothing to earn extra income to repay a loan. Many were afraid to 
venture into activities other than cultivation and animal husbandry, even though op-
portunities existed.
For mobile banking to work for borrowers, the following services had to be made 
available: offering appropriate loan products, linking lending and saving, and combin-
ing credit and human asset building.
For lenders, it was necessary that the mobile banking experiment be financially self-
sustaining. It thus required the following ingredients: group-based lending, linking for-
mal and informal credit, and reasonable interest rates.
Barely five years in operation, the mobile banking programme has proved to be rela-
tively cost-effective, providing financial services to 315,000 poor households. Preliminary 
data show that, on average, each mobile bank disbursed 1,921 loans, collected 1,387 pay-
ments, and transported cash on 75 occasions to 16 local points monthly. The excellent re-
payment rate suggests that the poor are good credit risks. The programme also mobilized 
1,983 small savings accounts every month, showing that the poor can be good savers.
As for Ma Seo Sang, she received a loan of about $300 and used the money to buy 
some chickens and pigs to raise. The income she made from selling her animals helped 
her earn a living.
Source: Hung, 2004.
Case example 13.1
Vietnam’s bank on wheels
380
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
In India, 65% of Indians do not have access to financial services, only 13% have debit cards, and 
only 5% of Indian villages have branch banking. There is only one branch bank for every 160,000 
people. Thus, India has launched a financial inclusion programme, where forty billion rupees is 
to be spent on the attempt to increase financial inclusion, initially focusing on villages with more 
than 2,000 people.
Rural financial intermediaries and microcredit1
Rural financial intermediaries (RFIs) and microcredit institutions play a crucial role in helping the 
poor and fostering the growth of small business where potential entrepreneurs are precluded 
from borrowing from the banking system because they are too poor and lack collateral. Within 
the structure of RFIs, there is a diversity of organizations and financial services. In the rural sector 
where most RFIs operate, and where most lending takes place, there are different niches and mar-
kets to be served. There are several case studies of successful RFIs. One such study is for Indonesia 
(Chaves and Gonzalez-Vega, 1996). In the 1980s and 1990s, the Indonesian government estab-
lished a network of semi-independent, locally operated RFIs that have been highly successful, 
largely through the recruitment of local agents to gather information on borrowers, monitor their 
actions and enforce loan contracts. This has kept down loan defaults to less than 2% of lending. In 
the early 1990s, there were 13,000 such intermediaries reaching out to over 4 million people, dis-
pensing loans of between $50 and $600. Most of the RFIs made accounting profits because fixed 
costs are kept low, and the effective interest rate is high, ranging from 30% to 84% per annum. 
Interestingly, the loans are not group-based; they are to individuals, and the pressure to repay 
comes from the local agents who are given appropriate incentives not to shirk, collude with the 
borrower, or be bribed.
This contrasts with the microcredit movement where most lending is through joint liability 
lending, which makes all members of the group jointly liable for any loan given to its members. 
If the group does not repay, there is no further access to loans. Thus, joint liability group lending 
stimulates screening, monitoring and enforcement of contracts among borrowers, reducing costs 
to the lenders. Because of the close proximity of borrowers within a group, information asym-
metries between lenders and borrowers are reduced. Evidence shows (see Hermes and Lensik, 
2007) that groups with stronger group ties have better repayment records, as do groups with 
written rules and a strong group leader, and which are more open geographically with no other 
access to credit.
There are now over 3,000 microfinance institutions across the world (some now also in devel-
oped countries), and it is estimated that at least 100 million poor people have benefited. The 
lobby group Microcredit Summit Campaign wants to see a vast expansion of such institutions, 
particularly to achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals.
It was Grameen (meaning village) Bank in Bangladesh that pioneered the concept of micro-
credit in developing countries. It was formally established in 1983 (seven years after the initial idea) 
by Muhammad Yunus, economics professor at Chittagong University in Bangladesh, who instead 
of teaching the economics of poverty from an ivory tower decided to do something practical 
about it, based on the philosophy that everyone has the right to credit, but the poor are excluded 
from the conventional banking system. But the best way for people to help themselves out of 
poverty is to be able to borrow to set up small businesses. Thus, Grameen Bank was founded as a 
microcredit organization to lend sums as little as $10 to the rural poor, especially women, with-
out collateral. A poor woman may obtain a microloan to buy an oven in order to sell hot food. 
 
381
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
She repays the loan with interest, others can borrow, she can borrow more to buy another oven 
and ultimately become a prosperous trader. Another poor woman uses her microloan to buy 
chickens, starts selling eggs, repays the loan, borrows more and becomes a chicken farmer. These 
are simple, real-life stories of what is possible.
Lending and repayment take place within a group context (usually five people) where members 
of the group agree to monitor one another, so that there is peer pressure to use loans wisely and to 
repay. Each member of the group normally comes from the same village and members have a simi-
lar economic and social background. Loans are first given to two members of the group, who are 
closely observed for two months and must repay the loan in weekly instalments. If the repayments 
are made, then two others can borrow. Loan use is monitored by the staff of Grameen Bank and 
groups meet collectively to discuss the choice of new projects. All credit transactions are discussed 
openly, so there is complete transparency concerning what is going on. There can be no ‘cover ups’ 
and no corruption. The record of repayment to Grameen Bank is close to 98% of loans; far better 
than the record of repayment to the commercial banking system where bad debts are rife.
Muhammad Yunus
Born 1940, Chittagong, Bangladesh. Professor of Economics at Chittagong 
University; founder of Grameen Bank in 1983 lending small sums mainly 
to groups of poor women, with the philosophy that everyone has the 
right to credit, not just the rich with collateral. The microcredit move-
ment has now spread throughout the developing world and lifted mil-
lions of families out of poverty. Yunus and Grameen Bank were awarded 
the Nobel Peace Prize in 2006.
The conventional explanation for the low default rate at Grameen Bank is the peer pressure 
from the group, but research shows (Pankaj, 1996) that the explanation is much deeper than 
this; it lies within the culture and ethos that the bank has developed among its employees, and 
the relationship between the bank’s employees and the client borrowers. Pankaj could find no 
evidence of members of a group not being able to borrow if one member defaulted. The main 
explanation for the very high repayment rate seems to be that the bank is tightly structured, 
with checks on clients and borrowings at every stage. Each borrowing group has five members, 
and six groups make a centre, which meets weekly at a fixed time. Each centre is supervised by 
an employee from a Grameen branch bank who may look after 10–15 centres. Each branch bank 
is answerable to an area manager. The line of command is clear and there is supervision at every 
stage. It is this organizational structure of the bank that lies at the heart of its success. Other banks 
serving the poor in rural communities could learn lessons from the Grameen structure.
Grameen Bank also involves itself in social development programmes in the villages to improve 
the quality of life, such as encouraging members to build houses and sanitation facilities, planting 
trees and kitchen gardens. There is also a comprehensive training programme in maternal health, 
nutrition and childcare. In Bangladesh alone, there are over 1,000 branches of the bank serving 
36,000 villages, which have lent more than $6 billion to 8 million people. In 2006, Muhammad 
Yunus and Grameen Bank were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
382
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
The Grameen idea has now spread to over 100 countries. Not all microcredit banks oper-
ate in the same way, but all are designed to lend to poor people denied access to credit from 
the commercial banking system because they have no collateral. Other well-known microcredit 
institutions across the world are BancoSol in Bolivia (the first microcredit bank to be set up in 
Latin America in 1992), Banco Compartamos in Mexico (lending mainly to women), Accion 
Internacional, based in the USA with affiliates in 13 Latin American countries (including Mibanco 
in Peru), Kenya’s Rural Enterprise Programme and Bank Rakyat in Indonesia.
At the beginning of the microcredit movement, almost all the banks relied on public subsidies 
to operate because of the high overhead costs of administering very small loans, despite high 
interest rates on loans of 20–30%. In the past ten years alone, microcredit institutions (many run 
by NGOs) have received public subsidies of $10 billion.
The challenge for the future is to see whether microfinance can be extended more on a com-
mercial basis without long-term subsidies, but without compromising the basic purpose of micro-
credit, which is to lend to the very poorest who are cut off from the normal banking system. Many 
profit-making microfinance institutions have sprung up in recent years, but have been criticized 
for high interest rates and exploitation of poor people. In Andhra Pradesh (India), more than 
fifty people, mainly women, committed suicide in 2010, leading state officials to intervene in the 
activities of commercial microlenders. Morocco, Bosnia, Nicaragua and Pakistan have all been hit 
by microloan payment crises in recent years.
At present, the evidence is that there seems to be a trade-off between the commercialization 
of microfinance and reaching out to the poor. Cull et al. (2007) attempt to examine this issue 
rigorously by taking a sample of 124 microcredit institutions in 49 countries to see whether there 
is any significant relation between the profitability of banks and their outreach to the poor. Three 
types of bank are distinguished: those that lend to groups (48), those that lend to individuals (56), 
and village lenders (20). What the evidence shows is that individual-based lenders seem to have 
higher profitability than group-based institutions, but the fraction of poor (and female) borrow-
ers in the loan portfolio is lower in the latter case. Cull et al. (2007) conclude:
we find examples of institutions that have managed to achieve profitability together with not­
able outreach to the poor – achieving the ultimate promise of micro-finance. But they are so 
far the exceptions. (emphasis added)
Cull et al. (2009) have also used data from the Microfinance Information Exchange covering 
364 institutions with £25 billion of assets and 10 million borrowers in the period 2002–04, distin-
guishing between the activities of commercial microbanks and NGOs. They find that:
•
• Commercial microbanks account for more assets, but NGOs reach out to more people.
•
• More microbanks are profitable (73%) than NGOs (54%).
•
• Most microbanks lend to individuals, while most NGOs lend to groups.
•
• NGOs give much smaller loans than microbanks.
•
• NGOs charge higher interest rates (25% a year for the median bank) than microbanks (13%) 
because operating costs are higher (26 cents per $ lent for NGOs compared with 12 cents per 
$ for microbanks).
•
• Default rates don’t differ between the two types of microcredit institution.
Cull et al. (2009) remark, however, that evidence on the social returns to microlending, and by 
how much people have been lifted out of poverty, is scant. This is the research challenge for the 
future. Case example 13.2 highlights a case study of a randomized control trial on the impact of 
microfinance in India.
383
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
In 2005, half of 104 slums in Hyderabad, India were randomly selected for the opening 
of a branch of Spandana, a microfinance institution, while the remainder were not, 
­
although other microfinance institutions were free to enter those slums. Fifteen to 
eighteen months after Spandana began lending to treated areas, households were 8.8 
percentage points more likely to have a microcredit loan. They were no more likely to 
start any new business, although they were more likely to start several at once, and 
they invested more in their existing businesses. There was no effect on average monthly 
expenditure per capita. Expenditure on durable goods increased in treated areas, while 
expenditure on ‘temptation goods’ declined. Three to four years after the initial expan-
sion, the probability of borrowing from a microfinance institution in treatment and 
comparison slums was the same, but, on average, households in treatment slums had 
been borrowing for longer and in larger amounts. There was no change in any of the 
development outcomes that are often believed to be affected by microfinance includ-
ing health, education and women’s empowerment. The results of this study are largely 
consistent with those of other evaluations of similar programmes in different contexts.
Source: Banerjee et al., 2013.
Case example 13.2
A randomized control trial of microfinance in Hyderabad, India
BRAC was established in Bangladesh by Fazle Hasan Abed (now Sir) in 1972 designed to 
help the ‘ultra-poor’ (mainly women) who could not qualify even for microloans. The 
philosophy of the organization is to provide people with an asset base, such as a cow, 
goat or a few chickens, which they are taught to manage themselves. While doing so, 
they are given a small stipend for food. The programme is quite costly (at least $1,000 
per household), but randomized control trials show that it works, and women do not 
fall back into poverty when the help terminates. It is estimated that the rate of return to 
women after going through the graduation programme is between 16 and 25%.
BRAC is the largest nongovernmental development organization in the world, now 
operating in eleven other countries outside Bangladesh. It employs over 100,000 people, 
it is 70–80% self-funded, and has helped more than 126 million ultra-poor people. In 
the early years, BRAC concentrated on community development through village devel-
opment programmes including agriculture, fisheries, cooperatives, rural crafts, literacy, 
health and family planning. Since then, it has branched out into other fields including, in 
1986, its rural development programme that incorporates institution building, includ-
ing functional education and training, credit provision, and income and employment 
generation. Over the past 30 years, BRAC has given $1.5 billion in microloans – more 
even than Grameen Bank. BRAC also focuses on the problem of youth unemployment. 
To help fund its development programmes, BRAC has a number of commercial enter-
prises, including a retail handicraft chain called Aarong, a dairy and food project, and 
BRAC Salt.
Source: http://brac.net.
Case example 13.3
BRAC
Another major international development organization that lends to the ultra-poor is BRAC 
(see Case example 13.3), which tries to tackle poverty from the bottom up in a way advocated by 
the World Bank (2001) in World Development Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty.
384
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Development banks
Development banks play a particularly important role in the development process because it is 
not the explicit function of the private commercial banking system to have development prior­
ities in mind when making loans, unless directed by the government. The function of commercial 
banks is to make a profit for their shareholders. This means that commercial banks are generally 
risk-averse and have short time horizons. It also means that they are only interested in their own 
cash flows and have no particular interest in the social profitability of the projects they lend for, 
or in lending to poor people. Development banks can afford to have longer time horizons, take 
more risks, pursue development objectives, and focus on the social profitability of lending, as well 
as encouraging saving.
The activities of Tonga Development Bank (where one of the authors was a consultant in 1995) 
provide an interesting case study. The bank was established in 1977 ‘to promote the expansion of 
Tonga for the economic advancement of the people of Tonga’. Its lending policy gives priority to 
projects that have the potential to increase exports or reduce imports, involve local entrepreneur-
ship, use local inputs, contribute to increased employment opportunities, particularly for women, 
and increase income for the poorer sections of the community in rural areas and the outer islands. 
Regarding exports, if economic growth is constrained by a shortage of foreign exchange, any project 
financed by the bank that earns net foreign exchange will give a higher social return than private 
return because the growth of output will be higher than would otherwise have been the case. In 
Tonga, the commercial banking system would not lend to producers wishing to grow the vegetable 
squash, because the venture was regarded as too risky. However, Tonga Development Bank lent nearly 
$10 million to squash producers, and squash now accounts for 80% of the country’s export earnings. 
The bank reaches out to nearly 50% of households in Tonga, and it funds 70% of all loans to the pri-
vate sector. It fills an important gap in the market for small loans because commercial banks will not 
lend for projects of less than $5,000. There can be little doubt that Tonga Development Bank plays 
a pivotal role in the development of the economy of Tonga and is able to do things that the private 
sector would not contemplate. The positive externalities conferred fully justify interest rate subsidies.
All development banks have a role to play in stimulating the capital market. They can do this 
by selling their own stocks and bonds to raise finance, by helping enterprises to float or place their 
own securities, and by selling from their own portfolio of investments.
Financial intermediaries
The importance of having a wide variety of financial intermediaries is that they can offer a diver-
sity of financial assets with different yields, maturities and divisibilities to suit savers and investors 
with different requirements and different time horizons. This can increase the level of saving and 
investment, and also improve the efficiency of resource allocation.
As far as the level of saving and investment is concerned, financial intermediaries offer four 
major advantages:
1.	 In general, savers wish to lend for only a short period of time (to remain liquid), while investors 
wish to borrow for a longer period of time. Direct lending from savers to investors, without 
financial intermediation, would involve savers committing themselves for longer periods than 
they would really like because investment does not generally generate returns immediately. 
Financial intermediaries, however, are able to pool risks and can borrow short and lend long, 
thus suiting both savers and investors.
385
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
2.	 The use of financial intermediaries reduces transaction costs. Direct lending, whereby savers 
have to find suitable borrowers or investors have to find suitable lenders, is time-consuming 
and costly. Reduced transaction costs encourage saving and investment.
3.	 Financial intermediaries can specialize in particular areas of business, which reduces informa-
tion costs by accumulating knowledge of various markets. This lessens the credit risks associ-
ated with lending, and also encourages greater saving and investment.
4.	 Investment projects are invariably larger than the savings of any one individual or group of 
individuals. The existence of financial intermediaries overcomes the problem of indivisibilities.
As far as the efficiency of resource allocation is concerned, the great advantage of financial 
intermediaries is that the creation of financial assets and liabilities allows savers to hold part of 
their wealth in financial form. This means that investment is no longer confined to the sector 
where the saving takes place, thereby facilitating the allocation of resources to the most product­
ive sectors of the economy.
Financial liberalization
The formal financial sector, consisting of a central bank, a commercial banking system and various 
other financial intermediaries, typically suffers from various forms of financial repression, which 
may thwart the development process. For example, the government may have a near-monopoly 
of the banking system and restrict the growth of financial institutions. Private sector banks may 
have to keep high reserve requirements and lend compulsorily to the government to finance its 
deficits. The central bank may impose credit rationing on the commercial banks, or insist that the 
banks lend to certain priority sectors. Nominal interest rates may be kept artificially low, so that 
with inflation the real rate of interest is negative, discouraging the acquisition of interest-bearing 
financial assets. These are all examples of financial repression.
The argument for financial liberalization is that the various forms of financial repression 
impede the development of financial markets. The consequences, it is argued, are a reduction of 
the flow of funds to the formal financial sector and distortion of the allocation of resources, lead-
ing to lower levels of saving, investment and output growth than would otherwise be the case.
The importance of the growth of the money economy and financial deepening for economic 
development along the lines indicated above has been stressed in the development literature for 
a long time (see, for example, Schumpeter, 1911, Gurley and Shaw, 1960 and Tun Wai, 1972), but it 
was McKinnon (1973) and Shaw (1973) who independently in 1973 first highlighted the dangers 
of financial repression in a rigorous way, and argued the case for maximum financial liberalization. 
Their views became highly influential in the thinking of the IMF and the World Bank in the design 
of programmes for the financial restructuring of countries as part of structural adjustment pro-
grammes. Their arguments, however, emphasize different points:
•
• McKinnon’s argument is that money holdings and capital accumulation are complementary in 
the development process. Because of the lumpiness of investment expenditure and the reliance 
on self-financing, agents need to accumulate money balances before investment takes place. 
Positive (and high) real interest rates are necessary to encourage agents to accumulate money 
balances, and investment will take place as long as the real rate of return on investment exceeds 
the real rate of interest.
•
• Shaw’s argument, on the other hand, stresses the importance of financial liberalization for 
financial deepening, and the beneficial effect of high interest rates on encouragement to save 
386
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
and discouragement to invest in low-yielding projects. The increased liabilities of the banking 
system, resulting from higher real interest rates, enable the banking system to lend more re-
sources for productive investment in a more efficient way. Figure 13.3 can illustrate the McKin-
non–Shaw argument.
Figure 13.3 is a standard classical savings and investment diagram showing saving as a positive 
function of the real interest rate (reflecting the idea of time preference and the interest rate as the 
reward for abstaining from present consumption), and investment as a negative function of the real 
interest rate (reflecting the diminishing marginal efficiency of investment). With no interest rate con-
trols, the equilibrium rate of interest would be r* and the level of saving and investment would be I*.
Now suppose that the government imposes a ceiling on the nominal deposit rate for savers, 
giving a real rate of interest of r1. This would mean that saving is I1, and on classical assumptions 
that prior saving is necessary for investment, this also constrains investment to I1. If there was no 
ceiling on the loan rate of interest, the banks could charge interest rate r2 to investors and the gap 
between r1 and r2 would give substantial profits to banks, which they could use for various forms 
of non-price competition. At r2 there is no unsatisfied demand for investment funds.
Suppose, however, that the interest rate ceiling applies to loans as well as deposits. This means 
that saving is still I1, but investment demand is now I2 and there is an excess demand for invest-
ment funds equal to AB. Credit will have to be rationed. There will be a tendency for banks to 
favour less risky projects with lower rates of return. This will lower the overall productivity of 
investment.
If the interest rate ceiling is raised so that real interest rates rise to r3, this encourages saving 
from I1 to I3. This leads to more investment, credit rationing is reduced and the productivity of 
investment rises. From this argument, it would seem to follow that saving and investment will be 
optimal and credit rationing will disappear when the market is fully liberalized and the real rate of 
interest is left to find its market clearing level at r*.
Critics of financial liberalization and empirical evidence
Many of the arguments for financial liberalization sound convincing on the surface, but a num-
ber of qualifications need to be made. The experience of financial liberalization across the globe 
has been very mixed, and we shall consider some of the empirical evidence relating to the effect 
l1
l 3
l *
l4
l2
B1
A1
r2
r *
r3
r1
l
A
S
B
Ceiling 1
Ceiling 2
X
S
Real interest rate
Saving and investment
Figure 13.3  The McKinnon–Shaw argument
387
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
of ­
liberalization on saving, investment and growth, as we examine some of the major criticisms 
of the financial liberalization argument (see Gibson and Tsakolotos (1994) for a comprehensive 
survey of the issues involved).
First, the argument refers to financial saving, but financial saving is only one type of saving. 
Financial saving may increase as interest rates are liberalized, but there may simply be a substi-
tution between financial assets and other assets, leaving total saving unchanged. It is also well 
known that any price change (in this case, the interest rate) has income as well as substitution 
effects. The substitution effect promotes saving by making current consumption more ‘expen-
sive’, but the income effect deters saving because at higher interest rates the same income can 
be obtained with less saving, and the two effects may cancel each other out. This being so, it is 
perhaps surprising, as Dornbusch and Reynoso (1989) once remarked: ‘to find so strong a belief in 
the ability of higher interest rates to mobilise saving’.
In fact, many of the empirical studies and surveys of the results of financial liberalization in 
various countries are extremely cautious in their conclusions. Research by Gupta (1987) on 22 
Asian and Latin American countries over the period 1967–76 suggests that there is little sup-
port for the ‘repressionist’ hypothesis that the positive substitution effect of real interest rates on 
savings dominates the negative income effect. The most important determinant of saving is real 
income. Giovannini (1983) concludes from his research on eight Asian countries that his results 
‘cast serious doubts on the view that the interest elasticity of savings is significantly positive and 
easy to detect in developing countries’. Similarly, a study by Cho and Khatkhate (1990), two World 
Bank economists, of the financial liberalization experience of five Asian countries concluded that:
financial reform, whether comprehensive and sweeping or measured and gradual, does not 
seem to have made any significant difference to the saving and investment activities in the lib-
eralised countries. It was believed until recently that removal of the repressive policies would 
boost saving. The survey in this paper of the consequences of reform does not reveal any sys-
tematic trend or pattern in regard to saving … it lends support to the conclusion that decisions 
to save are determined by several factors and the relationship between saving and real interest 
rates is at best ambiguous.
Bandiera et al. (2000) examined the liberalization experience of eight countries (Chile, Ghana, 
Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Turkey and Zimbabwe) over 25 years and concluded:
our results cannot offer support for the hypothesis that financial liberalization will increase 
saving. On the contrary, the indications are that liberalization overall – and in particular those 
elements that relax liquidity constraints– may be associated with a fall in saving.
Maxwell Fry (1995), a leading authority on finance and development and an ardent advocate of 
financial liberalization, has conceded that:
what is agreed … is that if an effect [on saving] exists at all, it is relatively small [and that] posi-
tive interest effects are easier to find in Asia than in other parts of the world, but even in Asia 
the effects appear to have diminished over the past two decades.
If financial liberalization does not increase aggregate saving, its positive impact on develop-
ment must come through a more efficient allocation of resources, which raises the productivity of 
investment. In other words, as stressed by Shaw (1973), financial liberalization should concentrate 
388
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
on the quality of investment rather than the quantity. There is not much evidence on this point, 
but the World Bank (1989) claimed, in its World Development Report 1989: Financial Systems and 
Development, that in countries with positive real interest rates, the average productivity of invest-
ment (as measured by the incremental output–capital ratio) is four times higher than in countries 
with strongly negative real interest rates. Bandiera et al. (2000) also conclude their study by saying 
that even if financial liberalization does not increase private saving, it does not follow that the 
process contracts the volume of funds applied to productive investment. For one thing, financial 
liberalization can increase the flow of capital from abroad, and, second, the reform process can 
have the effect of eliminating less productive uses of loanable funds. This is an area where more 
research needs to be done.
A second major criticism of the financial liberalization argument is that the model seems 
to treat banks simply as savings depositories, with the presumption that the supply of loans 
from the banking system depends on deposits held by the banks, and if deposits increase, loans 
will automatically increase. In short, the supply of credit is treated as exogenously determined. 
However, if banks have the power to create credit (which they do), backed by a central bank 
acting as lender of last resort, the supply of loans will depend on the demand for loans, not on 
the supply of deposits. The supply of loans becomes endogenous. Within this framework, what 
is important is not so much incentives for saving, but incentives for investment, which may 
require lower interest rates. This is part of the Keynesian and post-Keynesian critique of the 
financial liberalization school. The work of Paul Davidson (1986), the foremost post-Keynesian, 
is representative of this line of argument. Davidson argues that all that is needed to initiate addi-
tional real investment is finance provided by an increase in total bank loans and there is no need 
for prior savings, ‘as long as the banks can create new finance via acceptable bank accounting 
practices’.
How the supply of credit responds to the interest rate, and how investment is affected by the 
supply of credit and the rate of interest, becomes very much an empirical matter that can only be 
settled by an appeal to the facts. Warman and Thirlwall (1994) found that for Mexico, over the 
period 1960–90, financial saving responded positively to the rate of interest, and this led to an 
increase in the supply of credit from the banking system to the private sector. However, while the 
increased supply of credit affects investment positively, there is a strong negative effect of interest 
rates on the level of investment, holding the supply of credit constant, and the net effect of higher 
real interest rates on investment is adverse. This is also the central conclusion of Demetriades and 
Devereux (1992) from research on 63 developing countries over the period 1961–90. They find 
that the negative effect of a high cost of capital on investment outweighs the effect of a greater 
supply of investible funds. Greene and Villanueva (1991), in a sample of 23 developing countries 
over the period 1975–87, likewise show a negative effect of real interest rates on investment.
This leads to a third worry about the financial liberalization model, which is that it ignores 
the adverse effect that high real interest rates can have on costs and the level of demand in an 
economy, which may lead to stagflation (a combination of cost inflation and rising unemploy-
ment). This is another aspect of the post-Keynesian critique of the financial liberalization model 
(see Dutt, 1990–91). High interest rates not only discourage investment, but may also lead to cur-
rency overvaluation by attracting capital from overseas, which leads to a fall in exports, and also 
increases the cost of servicing government debt, which leads to cuts in government expenditure. 
This has occurred in Africa (see African Development Bank, 1994). Currency overvaluation and 
cuts in government expenditure are both deflationary. In Latin America in the 1970s, financial 
liberalization went wrong because there was an explosion of government debt, economic instabil-
ity and excessively high real interest rates, which led to bankruptcies, bank failures and prolonged 
389
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
recession. In the immortal words of Diaz-Alejandro (1985): ‘Goodbye financial repression, hello 
financial crash.’ Financial liberalization programmes were abandoned (temporarily).
A fourth critique of the financial liberalization school concerns the relationship between the 
formal and the informal financial sectors. Higher real interest rates are likely to attract funds away 
from the informal money market, or curb market, where there is no regulation over the use of 
funds. If banks are subject to reserve requirements and are forced to lend compulsorily to govern-
ments, the diversion of funds away from the informal sector may lead to the total supply of loans 
to the private sector being reduced. This is part of the argument of the neostructuralist school 
(see Buffie, 1984). The hypothesis is difficult to test directly without information on the supply 
and composition of credit from the curb market. To the extent that curb loans are mainly for con-
sumption purposes and the government uses the reserve requirements of the banks for product­
ive investment, the problem may not be serious. If, however, the curb loans are for investment 
and the government uses the banks to finance current account budget deficits, the reallocation of 
funds between the sectors will adversely affect the total level of saving and investment.
A final point to make is that it does not follow that credit rationing will necessarily be elimin­
ated and resources allocated more ‘efficiently’ if interest rates are not controlled and are allowed 
to reach their market clearing level. As Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) showed in a classic paper, banks 
suffer from the problem of adverse selection because of asymmetric information on the part 
of borrowers and lenders. Borrowers know more than lenders about the risks involved in a loan 
transaction. A rational profit-maximizing bank may therefore be expected to practise credit 
rationing to reduce risk, and not simply lend to those projects that seem to offer the highest 
return but with more risk attached.
Where do these various criticisms leave the financial liberalization argument? Clearly, the exist-
ence of financial repression has to be taken seriously, but it does not follow that the more liber-
alization there is the better, when we know that financial markets have many imperfections, and 
that competition between banks and other financial institutions can lead to financial distress if 
there are not institutional structures in place with adequate standards of accounting and auditing 
to prevent bad loans. Governments will always need to intervene for prudential reasons, and also 
for strategic reasons either as a major borrower or to direct credit. Particular care needs to be exer-
cised in the liberalization of interest rates because of their impact on costs, investment demand, 
the exchange rate and the cost of financing government deficits. This raises the intriguing ques-
tion: What is the ‘optimum’ real rate of interest for a country? This is virtually impossible to answer 
(see Clarke, 1996), but even in classical terms, it is not clear that the optimum real interest rate (r* 
in Figure 13.3 above) is necessarily positive. The savings and investment curves could cut below 
the horizontal axis if liquidity preference is very high and investment demand is very weak.
Ultimately, financial liberalization has to be judged by its impact on economic growth and 
development, and here the evidence is very mixed. In a major cross-section study of 80 countries 
over the period 1960–89, King and Levine (1993) conclude that: ‘higher levels of financial devel-
opment are significantly and robustly correlated with faster current and future rates of economic 
growth, physical capital accumulation and economic efficiency improvements’. Using cross-sec-
tion analysis, however, it is difficult to test for causality. It could be that financial development 
is itself the product of growth and economic development. In fact, Demetriades and Hussein 
(1996), taking time-series data for 16 countries, find considerable evidence of bidirectional causal-
ity between levels of financial deepening and economic development, and conclude that different 
countries exhibit different causality patterns, reflecting differences in financial sector policies and 
institutional structures. Barajas et al. (2011) analyse the relationship between financial deepen-
ing, measured by private sector credit as a percentage of GDP, across over 140 developed and 
390
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
developing countries over the period 1975–2005 and find that the relation differs across regions 
depending on the concentration of bank loans, the degree of competition in the banking sys-
tem, and the level of state involvement. In North Africa and in oil-producing countries, the link 
between financial depth and growth is weak. Arestis and Demetriades (1997) find that, in South 
Korea, the real interest rate and growth performance have been negatively related, and despite 
financial liberalization, South Korea has deliberately pursued a policy of keeping real interest rates 
low in order to encourage investment. This is also the message from the World Bank’s (1993) 
report The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policies: ‘a policy of moderate financial 
repression at positive real interest rates may have boosted aggregate investment and growth in 
the HPAEs [high-performing Asian economies] by transferring income from depositors, primarily 
households, to borrowers, primarily firms’.
De Gregorio and Guidotti (1995) suggest that the relationship between real interest rates and 
growth is likely to be an inverted U-shape because negative real interest rates are not conducive to 
financial development and growth, and very high real interest rates are also likely to reduce growth 
by adversely affecting investment and leading to a concentration on risky projects. Somewhere in 
between, growth is likely to be maximized. Fry (1997) tests this hypothesis across 85 countries for 
the period 1971–95 and finds broad support for the idea, with the growth rate maximized with 
the real interest rate at zero.
What is clear from all the evidence across countries and continents is that if financial reforms 
are to succeed, they must be implemented in an appropriate macroeconomic, financial and 
institutional framework, with proper sequencing between internal and external liberalization. 
Sequencing is important because if countries liberalize their external sector before or at the same 
time as internal liberalization, it could have severe repercussions for the exchange rate. If there is 
no confidence in the country, the relaxation of capital controls could lead to capital flight and 
downward pressure on the exchange rate. On the other hand, higher real interest rates could 
attract massive capital inflows, leading to excessive currency appreciation. Either way, exchange 
rate instability is not conducive to macroeconomic stability.
Liberalization has been more successful in Asia than in Latin America and Africa because it has 
taken place in an environment of greater macroeconomic stability, with a sounder institutional 
framework of regulation and supervision of the banking system. Macroeconomic stability means 
manageable fiscal and balance of payments deficits and low inflation to encourage the holding of 
financial assets and to allow funds to be devoted to the private sector. Confidence in the bank-
ing system is also important and requires the restructuring of bank balance sheets, the removal 
of bad debts, and a strengthening of the management and risk evaluation capabilities of bank 
managers in order to avoid bankruptcies. Governments need to strengthen banking regulation 
and supervision at the same time that liberalization takes place. For successful liberalization, Fry 
(1997) outlines the following five prerequisites:
1.	 Adequate prudential regulation and supervision of commercial banks, implying some minimal 
levels of accounting and legal infrastructure.
2.	 A reasonable degree of price stability.
3.	 Fiscal discipline.
4.	 Profit-maximizing, competitive behaviour by the commercial banks.
5.	 A tax system that does not impose discriminatory explicit or implicit taxes on financial inter-
mediation.
The results of a meta-analysis of financial liberalization and growth are given in Case example 13.4.
391
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
Since the early 1970s, the relationship between financial liberalization and economic 
growth has been hotly debated, in policy and academic circles. On the one hand, this is 
because, during the past two decades, many countries have liberalized their domestic 
financial markets. On the other hand, views with respect to the impact of these lib-
eralization policies differ. Whereas some have claimed that liberalization of financial 
markets contributes to the efficiency with which these markets can transform saving 
into investment, which ultimately fosters economic growth, others have pointed out 
that these liberalizations have contributed to various financial and economic crises 
in the past. Several papers have investigated the nature of the relationship between 
financial liberalization and economic growth. The evidence from these studies remains 
inconclusive.
This study aimed to provide a systematic analysis of the empirical literature by con-
ducting a meta-analysis of the relationship between financial liberalization and eco-
nomic growth based on 60 empirical studies. Two main conclusions emerge. First, the 
statistical results indicate that although, on average, there is a positive effect of finan-
cial liberalization on growth, the significance of this is only weak. Second, for most of 
the variables that may help explain the heterogeneity of results about the relation-
ship between financial liberalization and economic growth, significant results were not 
found, except:
1.  
Data from the 1970s generate more negative coefficients, which suggests that 
 
financial liberalization policies carried out during the 1970s seem to have a stronger 
negative effect on growth.
2.  
Studies that take into account a measure of the level of development of the finan-
cial system show a weaker relationship between financial liberalization and eco-
nomic growth.
Notwithstanding these qualifying remarks, the meta-analysis is highly valuable, as it 
provides the most comprehensive overview of the literature on the relationship be-
tween financial liberalization and economic growth available to date. Moreover, it is 
the first systematic analysis of this literature. The future challenge will be to improve 
on the meta-analytical techniques to extend the analysis of the financial liberalization 
growth nexus.
Source: Bumann et al., 2012.
Case example 13.4
A meta-analysis of financial liberalization and economic growth
Fiscal policy and taxation2
There is another arm of the prior savings approach to the financing of development from domes-
tic resources that needs to be considered, and that is the use of fiscal policy and taxation. Fiscal 
policy has two major roles in the financing of development. The first is to maintain the economy 
at full employment so that the savings capacity of the economy is not impaired. The second is to 
design a tax policy to raise the marginal propensity to save of the economy as far above the aver-
age as possible without discouraging work effort and consistent with an equitable distribution of 
the tax burden.
392
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Using fiscal policy to maintain full employment will involve deficit finance if unemployed or 
underused real resources exist in the Keynesian sense due to a deficiency of aggregate demand. 
While deficit finance may be inflationary in the short run until supply has had time to adjust, 
there is an important analytical distinction between the means by which resources are made 
available for investment through deficit finance at less than full employment and the means by 
which savings are generated by inflation. In the former case, savings are generated by an increase 
in real output; in the latter case, by a reduction in real consumption through a combination of 
factors, including a ‘real balance effect on outside money’ (this refers to the attempt by holders of 
money assets to restore the real value of their money balances, eroded by inflation, by redu­
cing 
their consumption. For a fuller discussion, see below); income redistribution from low to high 
savers, and money illusion.
Fiscal policy to raise the marginal propensity to save above the average is concerned with the 
implementation of taxes to reduce consumption in the private sector. Saving brought about by 
taxation is involuntary saving. How much taxation a country raises as a proportion of national 
income depends on two major factors: the taxable capacity of the country, and the tax effort 
made by the country in relation to its taxable capacity. The taxable capacity of a country depends 
on factors such as the overall level of per capita income of the country, the distribution of income, 
the level of literacy and urbanization, the size of the industrial sector, the importance of trade, 
whether the country has mineral resources, and the amount of foreign investment. In turn, the 
tax effort depends on the extent to which a country exploits these various tax bases and on the 
rates of tax applied to the bases.
The overall buoyancy of a tax system is measured by the proportional change in total tax 
revenue (DT/T) with respect to the proportional change in national income (DY/Y), and is com-
posed of two parts: the elasticity of tax revenue (DT/T) with respect to the tax base (DB/B), and 
the elasticity of the base (DB/B) with respect to income (DY/Y), that is:
(DT/T)/(DY/Y) 5 (DT/T)/(DB/B) 3 (DB/B)/(DY/Y)
(13.3)
If the tax system is progressive (with higher tax rates applied to higher levels of income or 
expenditure), then the elasticity of tax revenue with respect to the base will be greater than unity, 
and buoyancy will be greater than unity, provided the elasticity of the base with respect to income 
is at least unity. If buoyancy is greater than unity, then tax revenue as a proportion of national 
income will rise as national income rises. The buoyancy of the tax system can be increased by 
increasing the rates of tax or extending the base.
Any measured change in tax revenue with respect to income is likely to consist of an automatic 
increase in tax revenue as income increases if the rate structure is progressive, and the effect of 
discretionary changes in tax rates and extension of the tax base. The elasticity of a tax system is 
measured as buoyancy minus the effect of discretionary tax changes. There are techniques for 
estimating the elasticity of the tax system but we will not describe them here – suffice it to say 
that the greater the elasticity, the more that tax revenue and saving can increase without the need 
for discretionary changes. This is a desirable feature of tax systems in circumstances where it may 
be difficult to implement discretionary changes.
Tax effort depends on the elasticity of the system and overall buoyancy, and needs to be 
measured in relation to capacity. One way of doing this, pioneered by the IMF (see Tait et al., 
1979), is to take a cross-section of countries and relate their ratios of tax revenue to national 
income to the various measures of tax capacity mentioned earlier, namely per capita income, 
393
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
the importance of trade and industry and so on. Estimating such an international tax function 
gives an equation of the form:
T/GDP 5 a 1 b1(PCY) 1 b2(X/GDP) 1 b3(I/GDP) 1 other variables
(13.4)
where T/GDP is a country’s ratio of tax revenue to national income, PCY is per capita income, 
X/GDP is the ratio of trade to GDP, I/GDP is the ratio of industrial output to GDP, and the coef-
ficients b1, b2, b3 and so on measure the average effect of each of the variables on the tax ratio 
across countries. For example, if b2 was estimated as 0.5, this would mean that a country with a 
trade ratio that is 1% above the average for all countries will have a tax ratio that is 0.5 percentage 
points above the average for all countries, other things remaining the same.
By this method, a country’s tax effort can be measured by substituting its values for PCY, 
X/GDP, I/GDP and so on in equation (13.4), predicting what the tax ratio should be and then 
comparing the predicted value with the actual value of the tax ratio. If the actual value is greater 
than predicted, the country can be said to be making a good effort; if it is less, then the tax 
effort can be regarded as weak. A study of this nature has been made by Piancastelli (2001) for 
75 developed and developing countries over the period 1985–95, and the results are shown in 
Table 13.3. Any country with a tax effort index greater than 1 has a tax ratio greater than pre-
dicted. It can be seen from Table 13.3 that there are several developing countries making a good 
tax effort, including some of the largest and poorest such as India, Pakistan and Ghana. Equally, 
however, there are other developing countries making a very poor effort, including many coun-
tries in Latin America, notably Mexico, Argentina, Venezuela, Colombia, Bolivia and Peru.
The facts on tax revenue in developing countries are that tax revenue as a percentage of 
national income is typically low, averaging less than 20% compared with nearly 30% in high-
income countries, and taxes on income are a minor source of tax revenue compared with indirect 
taxes. The proportion of the population that pays income tax in developing countries is corres­
pondingly low, averaging about 20%, compared with the vast majority of the working population 
in developed countries, who constitute over 40% of the total population.
On the surface, there would appear to be a great deal of scope for using tax policy to raise the level 
of community saving relative to income. Two important points must be borne in mind, however. The 
first is that the rudimentary nature of the tax system in developing countries is partly a reflection of 
the stage of development itself. Thus, the scope for increasing tax revenue as a proportion of income 
may, in practice, be severely circumscribed. There are the difficulties of defining and measuring the 
tax base and of assessing and collecting taxes in circumstances where the population is dispersed and 
primarily engaged in producing for subsistence, and where illiteracy is also rife. There is also the fact 
that, as far as income tax is concerned, the income of the majority of the population is so low anyway 
that it falls outside the scope of the tax system. whereas 70% of national income is subject to income 
tax in developed countries, only about 30% is subject to income tax in developing countries.
Even if there is scope for raising considerably more revenue by means of taxation, whether 
the total level of saving will rise depends on how tax payments are financed – whether out of 
consumption or saving – and how income (output) is affected. It is often the case that taxes that 
make tax revenue highly elastic with respect to income are taxes that are met mainly out of sav-
ing or have the most discouraging effect on incentives. For example, very progressive income tax 
will discourage work effort if the substitution effect of the tax outweighs the income effect; and 
to the extent that high marginal rates of tax fall primarily on the upper income groups with a low 
propensity to consume, saving may fall by nearly as much as tax revenue rises.
394
Table 13. 3  Tax effort indices estimated over 1985–95
Countries
Actual tax 
ratio  
(a)
Predicted 
tax ratio 
(b)
Tax effort 
index 
((c)5(a)/(b))
Countries
Actual tax 
ratio  
(a)
Predicted 
tax ratio 
(b)
Tax effort 
index 
((c)5(a)/(b))
Countries
Actual tax 
ratio  
(a)
Predicted 
tax ratio 
(b)
Tax effort 
index 
((c)5(a)/(b))
Fiji
20.595
9.023
2.283
Botswana
26.766
22.224
1.204
Peru
10.728
12.223
0.878
Kenya
19.991
10.497
1.908
PN Guinea
18.825
15.774
1.193
Jordan
17.733
20.938
0.847
Belgium
42.357
23.774
1.782
UK
32.752
27.542
1.189
Panama
17.881
22.197
0.806
South Africa
25.182
15.297
1.646
Luxembourg
39.923
33.653
1.186
Philippines
13.696
17.218
0.795
Netherlands
44.273
27.228
1.626
Portugal
28.667
24.307
1.179
Madagascar
9.174
11.641
0.788
Ethiopia
11.665
7.502
1.555
Sweden
34.721
29.484
1.178
Japan
15.856
20.236
0.784
Ghana
11.76
7.776
1.512
Costa Rica
20.903
17.913
1.167
Dominican Rep.
12.677
16.432
0.772
France
37.808
25.785
1.466
Cameroon
12.784
11.011
1.161
Colombia
11.895
15.431
0.771
India
10.645
7.279
1.462
Spain
28.326
24.437
1.159
El Salvador
12.265
15.979
0.768
Lesotho
23.37
16.058
1.455
Belize
21.649
18.685
1.159
Mexico
13.752
18.431
0.746
Italy
37.482
26.176
1.432
Finland
28.219
24.777
1.139
USA
18.02
24.251
0.743
Zimbabwe
21.449
15.062
1.424
Austria
32.21
28.559
1.128
Turkey
12.452
16.899
0.737
395
Countries
Actual tax 
ratio  
(a)
Predicted 
tax ratio 
(b)
Tax effort 
index 
((c)5(a)/(b))
Countries
Actual tax 
ratio  
(a)
Predicted 
tax ratio 
(b)
Tax effort 
index 
((c)5(a)/(b))
Countries
Actual tax 
ratio  
(a)
Predicted 
tax ratio 
(b)
Tax effort 
index 
((c)5(a)/(b))
Uruguay
25.515
18.089
1.411
Syria
16.334
14.576
1.121
Congo (Dem. Rep.)
6.885
9.379
0.734
Morocco
22.534
16.027
1.406
Iceland
24.347
22.018
1.106
Switzerland
19.878
28.015
0.71
Namibia
27.595
19.957
1.383
Indonesia
15.737
14.533
1.083
Nepal
7.16
10.387
0.689
Egypt
20.704
15.121
1.369
Greece
23.093
21.862
1.056
Venezuela
16.119
23.675
0.681
Romania
21.053
15.797
1.333
Brazil
17.103
16.273
1.051
Argentina
11.401
17.434
0.654
Tunisia
24.165
18.171
1.33
Malaysia
20.016
20.417
0.98
Canada
18.008
27.743
0.649
New Zealand
32.996
24.815
1.33
Chile
18.801
19.451
0.967
Bolivia
9.451
14.62
0.646
Ireland
34.487
26.496
1.302
Thailand
15.62
16.45
0.95
Sierra Leone
6.789
10.772
0.63
Norway
32.86
25.263
1.301
Mauritius
19.667
20.72
0.949
South Korea
15.619
25.678
0.608
Pakistan
12.999
10.058
1.292
Malta
25.688
27.647
0.929
Paraguay
9.139
15.754
0.58
Denmark
33.84
26.369
1.283
Germany
23.485
26.413
0.889
Guatemala
8.024
14.269
0.562
Sri Lanka
17.886
14.422
1.24
Australia
22.017
24.904
0.884
Iran
7.423
13.702
0.542
Zambia
18.286
15.133
1.208
Ecuador
14.836
16.819
0.882
Singapore
15.672
38.905
0.403
Source: Piancastelli, 2001.
Table 13. 3  Tax effort indices estimated over 1985–95 – continued 
396
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
To avoid such large reductions in private saving, an expenditure tax on upper income groups, 
which exempts saving from taxation, is an alternative to a progressive income tax, but the disincen-
tive effect on work effort is not necessarily avoided. This is so because if the expenditure tax encour-
ages saving, the tax rate must be higher to yield the same revenue as the income tax. If people work 
to consume and the price of consumption is raised, work effort will be curtailed if the substitution 
effect of the change outweighs the income effect. The more successful the expenditure tax is in 
stimulating saving out of a given income, the higher must be the rate of tax to keep the yields from 
the two taxes equal, and the greater the disincentive to work is likely to be. If the expenditure tax 
is in addition to the income tax, however, there is no reason to expect any substitution effect in 
favour of private saving, so that whether aggregate community saving increases depends on how 
much work effort is discouraged and the relative propensities to consume and save of those who 
pay the tax compared with those of the government. In general, the most effective tax policy to 
raise the level of saving relative to income is to impose taxes on those with a high marginal propen-
sity to consume, namely the poor, but there are obvious considerations of equity to bear in mind in 
pursuing such a policy, as well as the practical consideration of political feasibility.
The prominence of agriculture in developing countries makes agricultural taxation a poten-
tially significant source of tax revenue and a means of transferring resources into investment. 
There are a great variety of tax instruments for taxing agriculture, including taxes on land area, 
land value, net income, marketing taxes, export taxes, land transfer taxes and so on. If revenue 
is the aim, then marketing and export taxes are probably the most efficient and the easiest to 
collect. As far as exports are concerned, two main systems may be adopted; the state-controlled 
marketing board may pay the producer a price that is lower than the international price received, 
or the government may require that all foreign exchange receipts be surrendered, with compensa-
tion given in local currency at an exchange rate that overvalues the local currency.
Export taxes may, however, have disincentive effects. The substitution effect of export taxes 
will be to discourage production, or to switch production to the home market if the home market 
is not saturated. Either way, the yield from tax will fall if the tax base (the level of exports) falls 
more than in proportion to the rise in the export tax. Trade taxes have also been shown to be very 
unstable because of the volatility of primary product exports (and imports), which can lead to 
severe budgetary problems for countries that rely on them (see Bleaney et al., 1995).
In theory, land taxes are probably the most desirable way to transfer resources from agricul-
ture, but, in practice, land taxes are not important as a source of tax revenue. It is also worth 
mentioning that no developing country has yet successfully applied a conventional income tax to 
agricultural income. The nearest that countries have come to this is to tax the value of land, the 
imputed income from land or the potential physical yield from land.
The balance between direct taxes on income and indirect taxation on expenditures and trade 
in the economy at large is heavily weighted in the direction of the latter, particularly in the form 
of import duties and sales taxes. The emphasis on indirect taxes reflects the difficulties already 
mentioned of levying direct taxes, and the disincentive effects that direct taxes can have. This is 
not to say that indirect taxes are totally devoid of disincentive effects, but they are probably less, 
especially if taxes such as sales taxes and import duties can be levied on necessities without too 
much social hardship. Indirect taxes on luxuries will raise revenue, the more so the more price 
inelastic the demand, but the taxes may largely be paid out of saving, to the extent that luxuries 
are consumed by upper income groups with a low propensity to consume. The equity grounds for 
such taxation, however, are still strong.
Taxes on business are relatively easy to collect and administer, but again business taxation may 
merely replace one form of saving with another. The marginal propensity to save out of profits is 
397
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
typically high. The main justification for company taxation must be to retain control of resources 
that might otherwise leave the country if the business is foreign-owned, or to substitute public 
for private investment on the grounds that public investment is more socially productive than its 
private counterpart.
Tax reform in developing countries3
Efficient utilization of the tax potential of developing countries raises problems that vary with 
the circumstances of each country, but there are certain fundamental changes in most of these 
countries that, if adopted, would make it possible to increase public revenue and reduce some of 
the inequities that now exist. In particular, if a tax system is to be accepted by a poor community, 
it must be seen to be administered honestly and efficiently, which means that every attempt must 
be made to minimize the scope for avoidance (legal) and evasion (illegal).
According to the classical canons of taxation, a tax system is to be judged by the standards of 
equity, efficiency and administrative convenience. In most developing countries, the tax system 
is neither equitable nor efficient and is administratively cumbersome. Avoidance and evasion 
are rife.
Equity requires a comprehensive definition of income and non-discrimination between 
income sources. A major deficiency of tax systems all over the world, and particularly in develop-
ing countries, is that there is no single comprehensive tax on all income. Typically, there is a ‘cedu-
lar’ system, with separate taxes on different sources of income. Wage and salary earners (‘earned’ 
incomes) tend to be discriminated against vis-à-vis the owners of property and capital and the 
self-employed (professional people and small traders). An equitable system should also be such 
that it discourages luxury consumption and makes it difficult to avoid and evade taxation.
Taxable capacity is not measured by income alone, but also by wealth. Equity therefore also 
requires the taxation of wealth. The ownership of wealth endows the owner with an inherent 
taxable capacity, irrespective of the money income the asset yields. Consider the case of a beggar 
with nothing and a rich man who holds all his wealth in the form of jewellery and gold, which 
yields no money income. Judged by income, their taxable capacity is the same: nil. No one could 
claim, however, that their ability to pay was the same, and that, for tax purposes, they should be 
treated equally.
Income tax is not only inequitable between those with property and those without, but also 
between property holders. For example, two property holders may derive the same income from 
property but the value of their property may differ greatly. One has a greater taxable capacity 
than the other. Only a combination of income and property taxes can achieve equity according to 
ability to pay. This is the case for a wealth tax.
Equity also requires that gifts between individuals be taxed, on death and inter vivos.
Efficiency requires that the entire tax system be self-reinforcing and self-checking so that the 
attempt to escape one tax increases the liability to other taxes. The system should also be based, 
as far as possible, on a comprehensive annual tax return.
The above considerations suggest at least four major reforms of the tax system in developing 
countries, which would also release resources for investment and act as an incentive to effort:
1.	 All income (including capital gains) be aggregated and taxed in the same way, at a progressive 
rate but not exceeding a maximum marginal rate of, say, 50%. Marginal rates above this level 
may not only discourage incentive but may also be counterproductive by encouraging evasion 
and avoidance.
398
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
2.	 The institution of a progressive personal expenditure tax levied on rich individuals who reach 
the maximum marginal rate of income tax.
3.	 The institution of a wealth tax.
4.	 The institution of a gifts tax.
Inflation, saving and growth
If voluntary and involuntary saving are inadequate, inflationary policies that ‘force’ saving by ‘taxing’ 
money and redistributing income between classes within the private sector are an alternative pos-
sibility. The price of financial conservatism may well be economic stagnation. The potential benefits 
of inflationary finance, which embrace both the Keynesian and the quantity theory approach to 
development finance, have been discussed by economists (including Malthus, Bentham, Thornton, 
Robertson and, more recently, Kaldor) at least since David Hume in the eighteenth century; and 
several economic historians (including Keynes) claim to have discerned a relationship in history 
between periods of inflation and rapid economic development. Hamilton (1952) claims that infla-
tion was a powerful stimulant to growth in a wide number of historical contexts through the 
favourable effect of excess demand on profits, saving and investment, for example in England and 
France in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and in England in the latter half of the eighteenth 
century. Rostow (1960) also claims that inflation was important for several industrial take-offs.
Keynes, in his Treatise on Money (1930), similarly remarked on the apparent extraordinary cor-
respondence in history between periods of inflation and deflation and national rise and decline, 
respectively. Keynes was certainly more predisposed to inflation than deflation. He described 
inflation as unjust and deflation as inexpedient, but of the two, inflation is to be preferred because 
‘it is worse in an impoverished world to provoke unemployment than to disappoint the rentier’ 
(Keynes, 1931). While recognizing that inflation to increase capital accumulation may have regres-
sive distributional consequences, Keynes (1930) further argued that the long-run gains to wage 
earners can outweigh the short-term losses:
the working class may benefit far more in the long run from the forced abstinence which a 
profit inflation imposes on them than they lose in the first instance in the shape of diminished 
consumption so long as wealth and its fruits are not consumed by the nominal owner but are 
accumulated.
The Keynesian approach to the financing of development
The Keynesian approach to the financing of development by inflationary means stresses, first, 
that investment can generate its own saving by raising the level of income when the economy is 
operating below capacity, and by redistributing income from wage earners with a low propensity 
to save to profit earners with a higher propensity to save when the economy is working at full 
capacity. Second, inflation itself can encourage investment by raising the nominal rate of return 
on investment and reducing the real rate of interest. Only the first of these two aspects of the 
Keynesian approach will be considered here.
Unemployed resources provide the classic argument for Keynesian policies of inflationary 
finance. If resources are unemployed or underused, real output and real savings can be increased 
by governments running budget deficits financed either by printing money or by issuing govern-
ment bonds to the banking system and the public.
399
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
In a situation of genuine ‘Keynesian’ unemployment, any tendency towards inflation, whatever 
method of deficit finance is used, should burn itself out as the supply of goods rises to meet the 
additional purchasing power created. Some economists have questioned, however, whether the 
observed unemployment of labour in developing countries is strictly of the Keynesian variety, 
and whether the supply of output would respond very much to increased demand. It is probably 
true that most unemployment in developing countries results not from a shortage of demand, 
but from a lack of cooperating factors of production for labour to work with (mainly capital); and 
the direct multiplier effects of government expenditure may be low, but some deficit-financed 
projects (e.g. infrastructure projects) may have considerable secondary repercussions on output 
if they eliminate production and marketing bottlenecks at the same time.
In the agricultural sector of developing countries, and in the production of consumer goods in 
the industrial sector, there are many opportunities for investment that can yield outputs several 
times more than the money value of capital invested in a very short space of time. In agriculture, 
the use of fertilizers and the provision of transport facilities are good examples. Credit expansion 
for these activities can soon generate sufficient output to absorb the demand-creating effects of 
the new money in circulation.
Thus, while it may be true that much of the unemployment in developing countries is not of 
the Keynesian variety, it does not follow that monetary expansion cannot generate secondary 
employment and output effects. The capacity-generating effects need to be considered in con-
junction with the emphasis on demand in Keynesian static multiplier theory.
Let us now turn to the Keynesian full employment case. At full employment, inflation is the 
inevitable result of the Keynesian approach to development. In contrast to classical and neoclas-
sical theory, Keynesian theory specifies independent saving and investment functions and allows 
price changes in response to excess demand in the goods market to raise saving by redistributing 
income. Inflation is the means by which resources are redistributed between consumption and 
investment. In Keynesian models, investment is not constrained by saving, but by the inflation 
rate willing to be tolerated by wage earners who have had their real wages cut.
If plans to invest exceed plans to save, it is reasonable to suppose that investors and consumers 
will both have their plans thwarted. Investment is less than firms desire, but greater than consum-
ers plan to save. Let us assume, therefore, that the actual growth of capital is a linear combination 
of planned saving and planned investment:
dK
K  5 a l
K 1 (1 2 a) S
K ,      a , 1
(13.5)
where K is the quantity of capital, l is planned investment and S is planned saving. Now assume 
that the rate of inflation is proportional to the degree of excess demand, as measured by the 
difference between plans to invest and save:
dP
P  5 la l
K 2  S
K b,     l . 0
(13.6)
where P is the price level. Substituting the expression for l/K into equation (13.5) gives:
dK
K  5  a(dP/P)
l
 1  S
K
(13.7)
400
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
S/K is planned saving, and a(dP/P)/l is forced saving, per unit of capital. Forced saving results from 
the inability of consumers to fulfil their planned consumption in conditions of excess demand. 
The underlying mechanism that thwarts the plans of consumers is inflation, which redistributes 
income from wage earners to profits. Other things remaining the same, if prices rise faster than 
wages, real consumption will fall and real saving increase as long as the propensity to save out of 
profits is higher than the propensity to save out of wages.
In Keynesian models, therefore, the effect of inflation on saving depends on two factors: the 
extent to which income is redistributed between wages and profits, and the extent of the differ-
ence in the propensity to save out of wages and profits. The relation between wages, prices and 
profits, and the consequent effect of income redistribution on saving, is best illustrated using 
simple algebra. Let Z be labour’s share of national income so that:
Z 5  W
PY 5  wL
PY 5  w
Pr
(13.8)
where W is the wage bill, w is the wage rate, P is price per unit of output, Y is income and r 5 Y/L 
is the productivity of labour. Hence, the rate of change of labour’s share may be written as:
dZ
Z  5 a dw
w  2  dP
P  b 2  dr
r 
(13.9)
From this equation, it can be seen that given a positive rate of growth of productivity, a sufficient 
condition for a redistribution of income from wages to profits is that prices rise faster than wages. 
Note, however, that in a growing economy (with positive productivity growth), it is not a neces-
sary condition. Labour’s share will fall and the share of profits rise as long as (dw/w - dP/P) < 
dr/r; that is, as long as the real wage rises less than the growth of labour productivity. In a growing 
economy, therefore, there is no necessary clash between the real wage and profits. The real wage 
can rise and the share of profits in income can also rise as long as some of the gains in labour prod­
uctivity are appropriated by the capitalists.
It is also obvious that on the classical savings assumption that all wages are consumed and all 
profits are saved, the savings ratio will rise by exactly the same amount as the wage share falls.
The basic Keynesian notion that investment determines saving forms the backbone of neo-
Keynesian growth theory, as originally expounded by Robinson (1962) and Kaldor (1955–56). 
Variations in the savings ratio resulting from inflation and income redistribution are one of the 
many possible adjustment mechanisms for raising the warranted growth rate towards the natural 
rate (see Chapter 4). As Robinson (1962) used to argue, in response to the neoclassical adjust-
ment mechanisms of variations in interest rates and the capital–output ratio, there is nothing 
in the laws of nature to guarantee growth at the natural rate, but if entrepreneurs wish to invest 
sufficient to grow at the natural rate, then saving will adapt, subject to an inflation barrier. (In a 
static economy, the ‘inflation barrier’ means a real wage so low that wage earners react to price 
increases to prevent the real wage from falling further. In a growing economy, it is the point at 
which labour resists any further reduction in its share of national income; that is, where labour 
appropriates all increases in labour productivity itself in the form of increased real wages.) When 
there is a steady rate of growth, the share of savings adapts to it. In effect, the actual growth rate 
pulls up the warranted growth rate by forcing saving. Saving adapts to investment through the 
dependence of saving on the share of profits in income, which rises with the level of investment 
relative to income in the way that has been described. Profits depend, in turn, on what happens 
401
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
to real wages when the system is out of equilibrium. The basic equation of Robinson’s model is the 
distribution equation:
PY 5 wL 1 pPK
(13.10)
where p is the gross profit rate R/K, and P, Y, w, L and K are as before. Dividing by P and rearran­
ging to obtain an expression for the profit rate, gives:
p 5  (Y/L) 2 (w/P)
(K/L)
 5  R/L
K/L 5  R
K
(13.11)
Given the capital–labour ratio (K/L), the rate of profit depends on the relationship between out-
put per head and the real wage. If all wages are consumed and all profits are saved, the rate of 
profit gives the rate of capital accumulation and the rate of growth. This follows since S 5 I 5 pK, 
and DK 5 pK; therefore DK/K 5 p. And if the capital–output ratio is fixed, DK/K 5 DY/Y; hence 
 
p 5 DK/K 5 DY/Y.
Variations in the rate of profit and corresponding variations in the real wage provide the mech-
anism that equilibrates plans to save and invest and the actual and warranted growth rates. If the 
actual growth rate equals the natural rate, the warranted and natural growth rates will also be 
equalized. If the real wage remains unchanged as investment takes place, however, saving cannot 
adapt and a greater volume of real investment cannot be funded. This is the inflation barrier in a 
static model. It appears, in fact, that in a static context, the growth rate can only be raised at the 
expense of the real wage, which comes close to the pessimistic development theories of Ricardo 
and Marx, as discussed in Chapter 4. In a growing economy, however, such pessimism would be 
unfounded because it can be seen from equation (13.11) that the rate of profit and capital accu-
mulation can rise even if the real wage is rising, as long as the growth in labour productivity 
exceeds the increase in the real wage.
Kaldor’s model also makes saving adjust to the desired level of investment through a rise in the 
share of profits in national income. The model consists of three basic equations:
Y 5 W 1 R
(13.12)
I 5 S
(13.13)
S 5 swW 1 srR
(13.14)
where R is profits, W is wages, sw is the propensity to save out of wages and sr is the propensity to 
save out of profits. Using the three equations we can write:
I 5 sw(Y 2 R) 1 srR
5 (sr 2 sw)R 1 swY

(13.15)
Making investment the independent variable in the system, and dividing by Y gives:
R
Y 5 a 
1
sr 2 sw
 b l
Y 2  
sw
(sr 2 sw)
(13.16)
The ratio of profits to income and the investment ratio are positively related as long as the 
propensity to save out of profits exceeds the propensity to save out of wages. The investment 
402
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
ratio must clearly be the independent variable in the system. Capitalists can decide how 
much they are going to consume and invest but they cannot decide how much profit they 
are going to make. If sr 5 1 and sw 5 0, then I/Y 5 R/Y, and, multiplying both sides of equa-
tion (13.16) by Y/K, we have Robinson’s result that the rate of profit, the rate of capital 
accumulation and the rate of growth are all equal. A higher level of investment can raise the 
rate of capital accumulation by raising the profit rate and the share of saving in total income, 
subject, of course, to the inflation barrier. The mechanism that gives this result is rising prices 
relative to wages.
The Kaldor model can be used for estimating how much inflation is necessary to raise the 
savings ratio by a given amount (see Thirlwall, 1974 for the model). The inflation rate required 
depends on three main factors:
1.	 Labour’s initial share of national income.
2.	 The difference in the propensity to save out of wages (sw) and profits (sr).
3.	 How fast wages chase prices (the wage–price coefficient).
If wages chase prices equiproportionately, and there is no difference in the propensity to save 
out of wages and profits, there can be no redistribution effects on saving by generating inflation. 
If there is a big difference in the savings propensities, and the wage–price coefficient is quite low, 
mild inflation of approximately 3% can increase the savings ratio by one percentage point. If there 
is only a small difference in the savings propensities, and the wage–price coefficient is very high 
(close to unity), over 100% inflation would be required to raise the savings ratio by one percent-
age point. Even Keynesians might regard such a rate as a high price to pay for extra growth (see 
Thirlwall, 1974 for a full range of estimates).
Reconciling the prior saving and forced saving approaches to 
development
There can be little doubt that the traditional development literature and the governments of 
most developing countries have veered towards the classical view of development when making 
policy prescriptions and formulating plans. But there is scope for a more eclectic approach. It is 
not necessary to be a classicist to recognize the importance of voluntary saving in capital-scarce 
economies, and it should not be necessary to be a Keynesian to admit that investors may lay claim 
on real resources in excess of the community’s plans to save. Keynesians welcome prior saving. 
What they dispute is that prior saving is necessary for investment; that investment is constrained 
by prior saving. As Robinson (1960, vol. II) said when discussing the relation between savings and 
investment at full employment:
We cannot return to the pre-Keynesian view that savings governs investment. The 
­
essential point of Keynes’ teaching remains. It is decisions about how much investment 
is to be made that govern the rate at which wealth will accumulate, not decisions about 
savings.
A start at reconciliation would be for the prior savings school to admit the possibility of forced 
saving and to reduce their aversion to demand inflation. Equally, the Keynesians could admit that 
saving depends on factors other than the functional distribution of income, and that for any 
desired savings or investment ratio, inflation will fall as voluntary saving rises.
403
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
The quantity theory approach to the financing of development
The quantity theory approach to the financing of development stresses the effect of inflation 
as a tax on real money balances. Suppose a government wishes to divert more of a country’s 
resources to investment; one of the ways it can do so is to invest on society’s behalf, financing the 
investment by expanding the money supply. In conditions where capital is already fully employed, 
monetary expansion will be inflationary.
Inflation is the means by which resources are effectively transferred to government. Inflation 
imposes a tax on money holdings and consists of a reduction in the real purchasing power of money 
and the real resources that the holders of money must forego to restore the real value of their money 
holdings. The base of the tax is the level of real cash balances (M/P), and the tax rate is the rate at 
which the real value of money is deteriorating, which is equal to the rate of inflation (dP/P). The real 
yield from the tax is the product of the tax base and the tax rate; that is, (M/P)(dP/P), which will be 
maximized (as in standard tax theory) when the elasticity of the base with respect to the rate of tax 
is equal to -1. If the rate of inflation is equal to the rate of monetary expansion, the real tax yield (R) 
will equal the real value of the new money issued; that is, (M/P)(dM/M) 5 dM/P. If dP/P . dM/M, 
some of the potential tax yield will be lost owing to a reduction in the tax base.
The inflation tax can be illustrated diagrammatically, as in Figure 13.4. DD is the demand for 
real money balances in relation to the rate of inflation. When prices are stable, the demand for 
real balances is D. At inflation rate P, however, which is expected to continue, the demand for real 
balances falls to M. The area 0PXM thus represents the amount of real income that holders of real 
money balances must substitute for money balances to keep real balances intact at level M. Since 
money balances must be accumulated and real income forgone at the same rate as the rate of 
inflation, the rate of tax is equal to the rate of inflation.
Inflation as a tax on money redistributes resources from the private sector to the government 
as the issuer of money – resources that are just as real as those obtained by more conventional 
means of taxation. Keynes was fully aware of this other aspect of inflation, as well as the tendency 
for demand inflation to transfer income from wages to profits. In his Tract on Monetary Reform 
(1923), Keynes describes inflation as ‘a form of taxation that the public finds hard to evade and 
even the weakest government can enforce when it can enforce nothing else’.
The real yield from the inflation tax available for investment as a proportion of income (RI/Y) will 
be the product of the money–income ratio, (M/P)/Y, the rate of inflation, dP/P 5 dM/M, and the 
proportion of the increase in the real money supply captured for investment (RI)/(dM/P), that is:
RI
Y 5 a M
PY b a dM
M  b a
RI
dM/Pb
(13.17)
dP/P
P
D
X
D
M
M/P
0
Figure 13.4  Inflation tax
404
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Suppose that the money–income ratio is 0.4 and 50% of new money issued is used for investment 
purposes, then a 10% expansion of the money supply leading to a 10% rate of inflation would 
yield 2% of the national income for the development programme. If all the new money is used for 
investment purposes, the real yield from the tax is simply the ratio of the real value of the new 
money issued to income (our earlier result), which in this example would be 2.5%. These calcula-
tions assume, however, that the desired ratio of money holdings to income remains unchanged 
regardless of the rate of inflation. In practice, the ratio is likely to be a decreasing function of the 
rate of inflation because the opportunity cost of holding real money balances rises. Only if the 
base of the tax falls more than in proportion to the inflation rate, however, will the yield from the 
inflation tax actually decline.
From the limited evidence available, it appears that the elasticity of the money–income ratio 
with respect to the rate of inflation is quite low even in high inflation countries. This suggests that 
inflation can operate effectively as a tax on money even in countries that have been experien­
cing high rates of inflation for many years. It should also be remembered that while inflation may 
reduce the desired ratio of money holdings to income, the ratio will have a continual tendency to 
rise with the gradual monetization and development of the economy. On balance, the ratio may 
be very little affected by monetary expansion.
The fact that the demand to hold money relative to income rises as development proceeds, 
and output is growing, also means that some government investment can be financed without 
any increase in the price level. This is easily seen taking the fundamental equation of exchange:
MV 5 PY
or:
M 5 KdPY
(13.18)
where M is the nominal money supply, V is the income velocity of circulation of money, Kd(5 1/V) 
is the demand to hold money per unit of money income, P is the average price of final goods and 
services, and Y is real income.
Taking rates of growth of the variables, denoted by lower-case letters, gives:
m 5 kd 1 p 1 y
(13.19)
It can be seen that if the demand for money per unit of income is increasing (kd . 0), m can be 
positive without the price level rising. Similarly, if the economy is growing (y . 0), m can also be 
positive without the price level rising. The government’s proceeds from monetary expansion will 
equal m - p. In several developing countries, the rate of growth of the demand for money per unit 
of income seems to be in the order of 5% per annum. This, combined with a growth rate of output 
of 3% per annum, would mean that the non-inflationary growth of the money supply would be 
in the order of 8% per annum.
Finally, it should also be added that government investment projects financed by monetary 
expansion can reduce an economy’s capital–output ratio (if the projects have high output–labour 
ratios and low capital–labour ratios), enabling a higher rate of capital accumulation for any given 
investment ratio, and therefore a higher rate of employment growth. Inflation is not necessarily 
inegalitarian if the government investment projects financed by monetary expansion help the 
poor in rural and urban areas by generating employment opportunities and raising productivity.
405
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
The dangers of inflation
Some of the benefits of inflation have been considered, especially the ability of inflation to release 
resources for development by redistributing income between classes within the private sector 
and from the private sector to government. Inflation is not without its dangers, however, and 
these must be emphasized.
First, a distinction needs to be made between the different types of inflation that may be exper­
ienced by a developing country: demand inflation, cost inflation and structural inflation. The 
argument for inflationary finance is an argument for demand inflation. Cost inflation, by reducing 
profits, will not be conducive to development. Structural inflation may be the inevitable price of 
development, but there is nothing in the process of structural inflation itself that will necessarily 
accelerate the development process.
There are also certain dangers and costs involved in deliberately pursuing an inflationary pol-
icy to stimulate development. The most serious threats to growth from inflation come from the 
effect on the balance of payments if foreign exchange is a scarce resource, and from the possibil-
ity that voluntary saving, productive investment and the use of money as a medium of exchange 
may be discouraged if inflation becomes excessive. If one country inflates at a faster rate than 
others, its balance of payments may suffer severely, leading to protection and exchange con-
trols, and hence inefficiency in resource allocation. As far as investment is concerned, if inflation 
becomes excessive, investment in physical plant and equipment may become unattractive rela-
tive to speculative investment in inventories, overseas assets, property and artefacts that absorb 
a society’s real resources. If the real rate of interest becomes negative (that is, the rate of inflation 
exceeds the nominal rate of interest), it may even become attractive to claim real resources and 
not to use them.
Inflation clearly reduces the purchasing power of money. If inflation becomes excessive, not 
only may voluntary saving be discouraged but the use of money as a medium of exchange may be 
discouraged, involving society in real resource costs and welfare losses. Since inflation reduces the 
purchasing power of money, holders may be expected to avoid losses by cutting down their hold-
ings of money for transactions purposes. The cost of inflation arises from the fact that cash bal-
ances yield utility and contribute to production, and inflation causes energy, time and resources 
to be devoted to minimizing the use of cash balances that are costless to produce; for example the 
frequency of trips to the bank may increase, which absorbs labour time, and credit mechanisms 
may be resorted to, which absorb society’s resources.
There are also the distributional consequences of inflation to consider. These are difficult to 
assess, but the following can be said with some confidence:
•
• Debtors benefit at the expense of creditors.
•
• Profit earners gain at the expense of wage earners in times of demand inflation and lose at the 
expense of wage earners in times of wage inflation.
•
• Real asset holders probably gain relative to money asset holders.
•
• The strong (in a bargaining sense) probably gain relative to the weak; and the young gain rela-
tive to the old, who tend to live on fixed contractual incomes.
In developing countries, however, the possible inegalitarian distributional consequences of 
demand inflation should not be allowed to constitute an argument against the use of mildly infla-
tionary policies if one of the aims is to create additional employment. The major beneficiaries of 
inflationary finance should be the unemployed and the underemployed, which represents a move 
towards a more egalitarian structure of household incomes.
406
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Having considered some of the potential dangers of inflation, it can be seen that there is plenty 
of room for disagreement over whether inflation is a help or a hindrance to development. We 
have seen that it can help to raise the level of real saving and encourage investment; on the other 
hand, it may stimulate the ‘wrong’ type of investment, and inflation may get out of control and 
retard development through its adverse effects on productive investment and the balance of pay-
ments. A lot clearly depends on the type of inflation under discussion and its rate.
Inflation targeting
Because of the perceived dangers of inflation – inflation is harmful to growth and development – 
many developing countries have recently copied developed countries, such as the UK and the 
countries of the EU under the direction of the European Central Bank, and adopted inflation 
targeting to control the rate of inflation. Countries such as Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, 
South Korea, the Philippines and Thailand all started the process in the late 1990s and early 2000s. 
Targeting a specific inflation rate, such as 5%, or a range between 4% and 6%, is a way of dampen-
ing inflationary expectations in an economy and lending credibility to a government’s monetary 
and fiscal policies for controlling the economy. The question is: Does it work, without sacrificing 
growth and employment? To evaluate this properly, the countries adopting inflation targeting 
need to be compared with a control group. When this is done, the evidence for developed coun-
tries is that targeting has no significant effect on either inflation or its variability (see Lin and Ye, 
2007). On the other hand, given that the credibility of central banks in developing countries is 
significantly less than in developed countries, it might be expected that the credibility gain from 
explicitly announcing an inflation target would be much more substantial in developing coun-
tries. Goncalves and Salles (2008) find this to be so in a sample of 36 emerging economies, but 
they do not compare their results with a control group. Lin and Ye (2009) rectify this deficiency 
by comparing 13 developing countries that adopted inflation targeting up to 2004, using 39 other 
countries as a control group. Their central conclusion is that inflation targeting has reduced the 
inflation rate by about 3 percentage points on average, but the experience varies between coun-
tries according to the length of time the policy has been adopted, fiscal discipline, exchange rate 
variability, and governments’ commitment to meet the preconditions for the policy of adopting a 
target inflation rate. Whether any costs have been incurred, however, in terms of slower growth or 
higher unemployment, is not explored. But what does the empirical evidence show of the relation 
between inflation and growth across countries? We examine this in the next section.
Inflation and growth: the empirical evidence
The discussion so far suggests that the relation between inflation and growth is likely to be non-
linear, with growth positively related to inflation up to a certain rate of inflation and then nega-
tively related as the disadvantages of inflation outweigh the advantages. This is in line with recent 
empirical evidence from large datasets across developing and developed countries.
A study by Bruno (1995) at the World Bank, taking pooled annual observations for 127 coun-
tries over the years 1960–92, produced the pattern depicted in Figure 13.5. Inflation and growth 
are positively related up to 5% inflation, and then ‘diminishing returns’ to inflation set in. Inflation 
and growth are strongly negative once inflation rises above 30%, but for inflation rates below 
20%, Bruno (1995) concludes that ‘there is no obvious empirical evidence for significant long-run 
growth costs’.
407
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
A study by Sarel (1996) at the IMF has produced a similar result. He takes 87 countries over 
the period 1970–90 and divides the observations into 12 inflation groupings using the inflation 
rate of group 6 as the standard of reference. He then estimates the effect that differential infla-
tion has on the growth rate in the other groups. The results are shown in Figure 13.6. It can be 
seen that inflation has a generally positive effect on growth up to group 7, with inflation averag-
ing 8%. Thereafter, inflation and growth are negatively related. When inflation is very high (in 
group 12), the difference in the effect of inflation on growth compared with group 6 is close to 
4 percentage points (holding all other factors constant). (These results support the early work 
of Thirlwall (1974), which also showed a nonlinear relation between inflation and the savings 
ratio, and inflation and the investment ratio. For a survey of models of inflation and growth, and 
some of the early empirical evidence, see Johnson (1984). See Temple (2000) for an overview.)
Ghosh and Phillips (1998), also at the IMF, show the growth of GDP to be highest in the range 
of inflation 3–5% for developed countries, and in the range 5–10% for developing countries (no 
doubt reflecting greater structural inflation).
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
–7
–20 to 0 0–5
5–10 10–15 15–20 20–30 30–40 40–50 50–70 70–100 100–200 200–10001000+
Per capita income growth (per cent) 
Range of annual inflation
Figure 13.5  Inflation and per capita income growth, 1960–92 (pooled annual observations, 127 
countries)
0.02
0.01
0
–0.01
–0.02
–0.03
–0.04
–0.05
–0.06
2
4
6
8
10
12
Inflation group
Standard of reference for group 6
Effect of inflation on growth
Figure 13.6  Effects of different inflation rates on growth
408
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Evidence of nonlinearity between inflation and growth is also found by Stanners (1993) in a 
study of 9 countries over the period 1948–86 and 44 countries over the period 1980–88. First he 
divides the 44 countries into four groups according to the rate of inflation and shows that the 
highest growth occurred in the second group of countries, with an average rate of inflation of 
8.2%. He then takes a scatter of 342 points for nine countries over 38 years and shows a positive 
correlation between inflation and growth up to 8%.
The most recent comprehensive study is by Pollin and Zhu (2006), who take 80 countries over 
the period 1961–2000, distinguishing between OECD (rich) countries, middle-income countries 
and poor countries. They find no significant relation between inflation and growth in the OECD 
and middle-income countries, but in the poor countries, there is a positive relation up to 15–23% 
inflation. Pollin and Zhu (2006) conclude:
There is no evidence … supportive of a policy of maintaining inflation within a low band of 
about 3–5 per cent, to the degree that government policy-makers are interested in promoting 
growth and employment, rather than low inflation as an end in itself. … There is still a wide 
range of inflation rates that are very likely to be associated positively with economic growth. … 
This is most especially the case when inflation is resulting from, as Bruno (1995) puts it, ‘invest-
ment demand pressure in an expanding economy’.
It is not surprising from this evidence that Temple (2000) concludes his survey of inflation by 
saying:
since there is not yet robust evidence that moderate inflation has an adverse impact on 
growth, any case for price stability which relies on a positive growth effect should continue to 
be regarded with considerable suspicion.
Similarly, Levine and Zervos (1993), in a review of studies of the macrodeterminants of growth, 
conclude that:
given the uncharacteristically unified view among economists and policy analysts that coun-
tries with high inflation rates should adopt policies that lower inflation in order to promote 
economic prosperity, the inability to find simple cross-country regressions supporting this 
contention is both surprising and troubling.
Indeed, we can be more categorical and say that there is no scientific evidence to suggest that a 
necessary condition for faster growth is that inflation should be as low as possible. The evidence 
suggests that mild inflation, up to 5–8%, can be positively beneficial for growth. After that, how-
ever, the effects of inflation can be seriously damaging, certainly at rates in excess of 20%.
The inflationary experience
Having discussed the advantages of inflation and warned of the dangers of excessive inflation, the 
fact is that the inflationary experience of most developing countries outside Latin America, at least 
until the recent past, has been relatively mild. It is a myth that developing countries have been 
typic­
ally prone to high rates of inflation. Out of a sample of 48 developing countries over the period 
1958–68, 38 recorded average rates of inflation of less than 6% per annum (see Thirlwall, 1974, p. 35 
and Appendix 1). Historically, most developing countries have been very financially conservative.
409
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
From the mid-1970s, however, there was a marked acceleration of inflation worldwide, sparked 
by the oil price rises in 1973 and 1979, as well as other commodity price rises, and this contin-
ued into the 1980s and 1990s in many countries. Since 2000, however, the rate of inflation has 
subsided, at least in developed countries. The average rate of inflation country by country over 
the period 2000–14 is shown in Table 13.4. It can be seen that there is a wide variety of experi-
ence between countries, but, on balance, developing countries have been more prone to inflation 
than developed countries. In developed countries, the average rate of inflation has been about 
5%, whereas in low- and middle-income countries, it has been closer to 10%. Some notable high 
inflation countries in the past decade have been in Africa: Ghana, 22.8%, Guinea, 16.1%, Nigeria, 
15.7%, Malawi, 14.9%, and Sudan and Ethiopia, 13.7%. Some Latin American countries have also 
recorded some high inflation rates: Venezuela, 25.3%, Argentina, 17.3%, Brazil and Uruguay, 
8%, and Paraguay, 7.5% Historically, Latin America has been the most inflation-prone contin­
ent, almost from the start of the industrialization process, and it was in Latin America that the 
 
‘structuralist–monetarist’ controversy started over the causes of rapid inflation in poor countries. 
We conclude this chapter with an overview of the debate, which still has relevance today.
GDP implicit 
deﬂator average 
annual % growth 
2000–2014
GDP implicit 
deflator average 
annual % growth 
2000 -2014
GDP implicit 
deflator average 
annual % growth 
2000 -2014
Afghanistan
8.0
Belize
1.8
Channel Islands
3.6
Albania
2.9
Benin
2.9
Chile
5.3
Algeria
8.1
Bermuda
3.6
China
4.6
American Samoa
Bhutan
5.5
Hong Kong SAR, 
China
0.1
Andorra
2.4
Bolivia
7.2
Macao SAR, China
5.4
Angola
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
3.3
Colombia
5.3
Antigua and Barbuda
1.9
Botswana
7.3
Comoros
3.0
Argentina
17.3
Brazil
8.0
Congo, Dem. Rep.
17.9
Armenia
4.6
Brunei Darussalam
4.9
Congo, Rep.
6.2
Aruba
4.6
Bulgaria
5.1
Costa Rica
8.7
Australia
3.7
Burkina Faso
3.0
Cote d’Ivoire
3.2
Austria
1.8
Burundi
11.9
Croatia
3.1
Azerbaijan
9.2
Cape Verde
1.9
Cuba
2.7
Bahamas, The
1.4
Cambodia
4.4
Curacao
Bahrain
5.7
Cameroon
2.6
Cyprus
2.6
Bangladesh
6.3
Canada
2.3
Czech Republic
1.6
Barbados
1.9
Cayman Islands
Denmark
2.2
Belarus
25.6
Central African 
Republic
2.7
Djibouti
3.9
Belgium
1.8
Chad
5.7
Dominica
1.5
Table 13.4  Inflation
continued overleaf
410
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
GDP implicit 
deﬂator average 
annual % growth 
2000–2014
GDP implicit 
deflator average 
annual % growth 
2000 -2014
GDP implicit 
deflator average 
annual % growth 
2000 -2014
Dominican Republic
10.6
Ireland
0.7
Mexico
5.2
Ecuador
7.4
Isle of Man
3.5
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
2.7
Egypt, Arab Rep.
9.6
Israel
1.8
Moldova
9.6
El Salvador
3.1
Italy
2.0
Monaco
1.9
Equatorial Guinea
8.9
Jamaica
10.2
Mongolia
15.3
Eritrea
15.5
Japan
-0.9
Montenegro
5.5
Estonia
5.3
Jordan
6.2
Morocco
2.0
Ethiopia
13.7
Kazakhstan
14.2
Mozambique
6.2
Faeroe Islands
Kenya
9.1
Myanmar
6.4
Fiji
4.5
Kiribati
1.4
Namibia
6.8
Finland
1.7
Korea, Dem. Rep.
Nepal
8.2
France
1.6
Korea, Rep.
2.2
Netherlands
1.7
French Polynesia
Kosovo
2.0
New Caledonia
Gabon
5.3
Kuwait
7.5
New Zealand
2.7
Gambia, The
5.7
Kyrgyz Republic
9.9
Nicaragua
8.5
Georgia
6.1
Lao PDR
7.1
Niger
3.7
Germany
1.2
Latvia
6.0
Nigeria
15.7
Ghana
22.8
Lebanon
2.8
Northern Mariana 
Islands
Greece
2.2
Lesotho
6.9
Norway
4.4
Greenland
-2.1
Liberia
8.7
Oman
8.8
Grenada
2.4
Libya
10.4
Pakistan
11.0
Guam
Liechtenstein
0.7
Palau
2.6
Guatemala
5.4
Lithuania
3.7
Panama
3.7
Guinea
16.1
Luxembourg
3.1
Papua New Guinea
5.1
Guinea-Bissau
2.4
Macedonia, FYR
2.8
Paraguay
7.5
Guyana
11.7
Madagascar
9.7
Peru
3.4
Haiti
11.2
Malawi
14.9
Philippines
4.3
Honduras
6.1
Malaysia
4.0
Poland
2.7
Hungary
4.2
Maldives
5.5
Portugal
2.0
Iceland
5.3
Mali
3.9
Puerto Rico
4.6
India
6.1
Malta
2.9
Qatar
8.4
Indonesia
10.5
Marshall Islands
2.6
Romania
11.2
Iran, Islamic Rep.
17.9
Mauritania
8.1
Russian Federation
13.4
Iraq
11.3
Mauritius
5.0
Rwanda
9.0
Table 13.4  Inflation – continued
411
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
GDP implicit 
deﬂator average 
annual % growth 
2000–2014
GDP implicit 
deflator average 
annual % growth 
2000 -2014
GDP implicit 
deflator average 
annual % growth 
2000 -2014
Samoa
3.6
St. Kitts and Nevis
2.9
Turkmenistan
16.0
San Marino
2.2
St. Lucia
3.3
Turks and Caicos 
Islands
Sao Tome and 
Principe
14.3
St. Martin (French 
part)
Tuvalu
2.4
Saudi Arabia
6.1
St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines
2.2
Uganda
8.9
Senegal
2.5
Sudan
13.7
Ukraine
15.4
Serbia
11.1
Suriname
15.5
United Arab Emirates
7.0
Seychelles
10.4
Swaziland
9.0
United Kingdom
2.5
Sierra Leone
12.2
Sweden
1.7
United States
2.1
Singapore
1.4
Switzerland
0.8
Uruguay
8.0
Sint Maarten (Dutch 
part)
Syrian Arab 
Republic
6.4
Uzbekistan
21.2
Slovak Republic
2.1
Tajikistan
17.4
Vanuatu
3.0
Slovenia
2.8
Tanzania
11.3
Venezuela, RB
25.3
Solomon Islands
6.5
Thailand
3.1
Vietnam
10.6
Somalia
Timor-Leste
4.5
Virgin Islands (U.S.)
South Africa
7.1
Tonga
5.8
West Bank and Gaza
4.5
South Sudan
Trinidad and 
Tobago
5.4
Yemen, Rep.
12.0
Spain
2.2
Tunisia
3.9
Zambia
12.8
Sri Lanka
10.8
Turkey
11.1
Zimbabwe
8.4
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2015, online (http://wdi.worldbank.org/table/4.16#).
Table 13.4  Inflation – continued
The structuralist–monetarist debate in Latin America
The inflation rate in countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, Chile and Uruguay has 
reached over 100% at times since the Second World War. In the early postwar years, a heated 
debate developed, which still smoulders today, over the major cause of rapid price increases. The 
participants in the debate polarized into two schools, frequently referred to as the structuralists 
and the monetarists. Although the debate is set in the Latin American context, it is nonetheless 
of general interest and in many ways is analogous to the Keynesian–monetarist debate that took 
place in developed countries in the 1970s and 1980s over the causes of inflation. It might also be 
said that the two debates have been equally inconclusive.
The essence of the structuralist argument is that the basic forces of inflation are structural in 
nature, that inflation is a supply phenomenon and can only be remedied by monetary and fiscal 
412
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
means at the expense of the underutilization of resources. The role of monetary expansion in 
propagating inflation is not denied; what is disputed is that inflation has its origins in monetary 
factors. In the structuralists’ view, monetary policy can only attack the symptoms of inflation, not 
its root causes.
In support of the argument that inflation emanates from the supply side, the structuralists 
point to the characteristic features of developing countries: the rapid structural changes taking 
place in the economy and supply inelasticities leading to bottlenecks, and refer back to the pre-
industrialization era of Latin America when inflation was much less severe than it has been in the 
recent past. Prior to 1930, there was relative price stability due to fairly elastic supplies of agricul-
tural output and low population growth. But Latin America then entered the industrialization era 
with a capitalist class that was reluctant to invest, and with growing population pressure on food 
supplies, which together contributed to bottlenecks and the beginnings of inflation, subsequently 
exacerbated by a wage–price spiral and currency depreciation.
There is some dispute about whether this picture is accurate for the whole of Latin America, 
however. According to some observers, the sequence of events described by the structuralist 
school is more a description of a particular country, Chile. Indeed, Campos (1961) went as far 
as to say that any visitor to the Economic Commission for Latin America in Santiago could 
not help but feel that the thinking of the structuralist school had been affected by the pecu-
liarities of Chilean inflation. But Campos was a confessed monetarist. For even in the Chilean 
case, he claims that the bottlenecks observed were induced by inflation itself and were not 
causal elements in the process. This is a more general claim of the monetarist school. They 
argue that supply bottlenecks are created by policies that discourage investment, for example 
price controls. Thus, they maintain that the act of repressing inflation, instead of tackling the 
monetary causes of inflation, creates bottlenecks that subsequently feed the inflation. But, in 
the first instance, inflation is caused by excess demand due to monetary expansion. In support 
of the monetarists, it does seem to be the case that in countries where prices have risen the 
fastest, the money supply has also grown most rapidly, but this does not answer the question 
of whether monetary expansion initiates inflation or simply ‘finances’ inflationary tendencies 
already present on the supply side. Moreover, if there was tighter monetary control, would 
it be inflation or output that would fall the most? There is no consensus, but a majority of 
observers seem to pinpoint supply factors as the main contributors to rising prices – particu-
larly agricultural bottlenecks and exchange rate depreciation due to balance of payments dif-
ficulties. It is possible to argue, of course, that all balance of payments deficits are a monetary 
phenomenon, but the more relevant question is: What is the cause of deficits in the first place? 
Most balance of payments difficulties in Latin America have to do with a high income elasticity 
of demand for imports and low export growth because of the poor supply characteristics of 
domestic goods (for a ‘structural’ interpretation of Bolivian hyperinflation, see Pastor (1991); 
and see Chapter 16).
Summary
•
• Development requires investment, and saving is necessary to fund investment (although not 
necessarily to finance it).
•
• There are three main analytical approaches to the finance of development from domestic 
 
resources: the prior saving approach, the Keynesian approach and the quantity theory 
 
approach, which all focus on the ways in which saving and investment can be raised.
413
1 3  •  F I N A N C I N G  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  F R O M  D O M E S T I C  ­
R E S O U R C E S
•
• The prior saving approach focuses on raising voluntary and involuntary saving through mon-
etary and fiscal policy. The Keynesian approach emphasizes incentives to invest, which can 
generate its own saving. The quantity theory approach focuses on ‘forcing’ saving through in-
flationary policies.
•
• Voluntary saving depends on the capacity and willingness to save determined by the level of 
income, the growth of income, the rate of interest and the availability of financial assets.
•
• Most developing countries have a dual financial structure with a large informal financial sector 
serving the poor, rural, subsistence sector, and a formal financial sector serving those with col-
lateral to borrow.
•
• Rural financial intermediaries and microcredit play an important role in the lending and bor-
rowing activities of poor people.
•
• The formal financial sector often suffers various forms of financial repression impeding the 
growth of the financial system.
•
• Financial liberalization programmes have been implemented in many developing countries, 
often under pressure, with mixed results.
•
• Involuntary saving depends on tax policy. Tax effort is weak in many developing countries.
•
• Investment can generate its own saving through a rise in income if the economy is at less than 
full employment, or through a redistribution of income by inflation from wage earners with a 
low propensity to save to profit earners with a higher propensity to save if the economy is at full 
employment (this is the Keynesian argument).
•
• Governments can invest on society’s behalf and finance the investment by monetary ­
expansion. 
If this is inflationary, this will ‘force’ saving (the idea of inflation as a tax on money).
•
• Inflation poses some dangers, but the empirical evidence shows a positive relation between 
inflation and growth up to about 5–8% inflation.
•
• Many Latin American countries have experienced high inflation in the past, but the monetarist– 
 
structuralist debate, which originated there, is largely inconclusive.
1.	 What is the difference between voluntary saving, involuntary saving and ‘forced’ 
saving?
2.	 What are the main determinants of voluntary saving?
3.	 How can ‘monetization’ of the economy help to raise the level and productivity of 
capital accumulation in developing economies?
4.	 What are the essential features of the informal financial sector in developing 
countries?
5.	 Outline the main requisites of a well-developed financial system.
6.	 What forms do financial repression take in developing countries?
7.	 What are the dangers of financial liberalization, and on what factors does the suc-
cess of liberalization depend?
8.	 What role do special development banks and microcredit play in financing 
­
development?
Discussion questions
Chapter 13
414
F I N A N C I N G  E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Notes
1.  
For a survey of microcredit, see Morduch (1999), Armendariz and Morduch (2005), and Hermes 
and Lensink (2007).
2.  For a comprehensive discussion of the general issues in this field, see Bird (1991) and Burgess and 
Stern (1993).
3.  For an excellent discussion of general issues, and with specific reference to Pakistan, see Ahmad and 
Stern (1991).
Websites on banking and finance
Microcredit
Grameen Development Bank www.grameen-info.org
BancoSol in Bolivia www.bancosol.com.bo/
Microcredit Summit Campaign www.microcreditsummit.org
Banking
Central bank list www.centralbanksguide.com/central1banks1list/
9.	 Suggest reforms to the tax system in developing countries that would promote 
equity and more saving for investment.
10.	 What is meant by ‘inflation as a tax on money’?
11.	 In what ways is demand inflation conducive to growth and development?
12.	 What conclusions would you draw from the recent empirical evidence on the 
relation between inflation and growth?
Discussion questions – continued
Chapter 13
