533
•
• Introduction
•
• Balance of payments constrained growth
•
• The terms of trade
•
• The exchange rate and devaluation
•
• The IMF supply-side approach to devaluation
•
• The growth of world income and structural change
•
• Application of the balance of payments constrained growth model
•
• Capital ﬂows
•
• Exchange rate systems for developing countries
•
• The international monetary system and developing countries
•
• How the IMF works
•
• IMF lending
•
• Criticisms of the IMF
•
• The results of IMF programmes
•
• Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) and developing countries
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Websites on balance of payments and IMF
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS, 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY 
ASSISTANCE AND 
DEVELOPMENT
16
534
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Introduction
We have seen how the composition of trade of developing countries can lead to severe balance of 
payments difficulties, which can act as a constraint on growth, and how vulnerable many devel-
oping countries are to exogenous shocks that adversely affect their export earnings and import 
payments.
In this chapter we develop a simple model of balance of payments constrained growth, first 
of all without capital ﬂows and then allowing current account deficits to be financed by capital 
inﬂows. It is shown that growth consistent with current account equilibrium depends on four 
major factors:
1.	 What is happening to the real terms of trade (or real exchange rate) and the price elasticities of 
demand for exports and imports.
2.	 The growth of world income.
3.	 The income elasticity of demand for a country’s exports.
4.	 The income elasticity of demand for imports.
We show that if the real terms of trade are constant, a country’s growth rate can be approximated 
by the ratio of export growth to the income elasticity of demand for imports.
The model has several policy implications relating to exchange rate policy, industrial policy 
to improve the income elasticity of demand for exports, and trade policy to reduce the income 
elasticity of demand for imports. Different types of exchange rate regimes are considered, from 
fixed pegs to free ﬂoating, and a cautionary tale is told from the East Asian financial crisis of 
1997.
The model with capital ﬂows shows how capital inﬂows can relax the constraint of current 
account equilibrium, but the extra growth is minimal because there are limits to the current 
account deficit to GDP ratio (and the international debt to GDP ratio).
The original purpose of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was to provide short-term 
balance of payments support to countries and it does this through various facilities, such 
as Stand-By Arrangements, Extended Fund Facility, Extended Credit Facility, Standby Credit 
Facility, Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and other special facilities. But the IMF imposes 
conditions on lending, and the more lending, the harsher the conditions. We examine the results 
of the IMF’s programmes in developing countries and the criticisms of the policies imposed.
The chapter ends with a discussion of the potential of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) to 
aid developing countries without them having to adjust to balance of payments difficulties by 
deﬂating their economies.
Balance of payments constrained growth
Poor countries are in balance of payments deficit most of the time, but the deficits ﬂuctuate 
according to internal and external economic circumstances. In the 1970s, for example, owing to 
the oil shocks in 1973 and 1979 and the slowdown of world growth, the deficits grew consider-
ably, despite a slowdown of internal growth that reduced the demand for non-oil imports. In the 
early 1980s, the deficits contracted because most developing countries were forced to adjust (that 
is, deﬂate their economies) in order to repay debt out of diminished export earnings. In the late 
1980s, the deficits increased again, with some internal recovery and a greater willingness of the 
international capital markets to resume lending. By 1996, the deficits totalled $98 billion, over half 
535
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
of which was accounted for by Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia and South Korea, 
which all experienced serious financial crises in 1997. These countries had to readjust, and since 
2002, East Asia and the Pacific have been in big surplus. Today, China has a huge surplus, but many 
African countries have deficits in excess of 10% of GDP. The world as a whole is plagued with seri-
ous payments imbalances. For any country or continent, the observed deficit (ex post) measures 
the extent to which it has been able and willing to finance the difference between the value of 
import payments and the value of export receipts.
All countries have a growth rate that is consistent with balance of payments equilibrium on 
the current account, and with its overall balance on the current and capital account. What deter-
mines the growth rate that is consistent with current account balance on the one hand, and over-
all balance on the other? If we specify the equilibrium equations and the determinants of import 
and export demand, we can immediately see the major factors of importance, and we can, in turn, 
understand the various policy measures taken by individual countries and the international com-
munity to raise the growth rate of less developed countries consistent with balance of payments 
equilibrium. For the original development of this model, see Thirlwall (1979). For an overview 
of the literature, see McCombie and Thirlwall (1997, 2004), Thirlwall (2011) and Soukiazis and 
Cerqueira (2012).
The current account balance of payments of a country, measured in its own domestic currency, 
may be written as:
PdX 5 Pf ME
(16.1)
where X measures the quantity of exports and Pd is the average price of exports, so PdX is the value 
of exports in domestic currency. M is the quantity of imports, Pf is the average (foreign) price of 
imports and E is the nominal exchange rate measured as the domestic price of foreign currency, 
which thus converts the value of imports measured in foreign currency (Pf M) into a domestic 
currency equivalent.
The condition for the balance of payments to remain in equilibrium in a growing economy 
through time is that the rate of growth of export earnings should equal the rate of growth of 
import payments, that is:
(pd 1 x) 5 (pf 1 m 1 e)
(16.2)
where the lower-case letters represent rates of change of the variables.
Now let us consider what the growth of export and import volume depends on. Export demand 
may be expected to depend primarily on the price of a country’s exports relative to the foreign 
price of similar goods (expressed in a common currency) and on the level of ‘world’ income, 
which determines the purchasing power over a country’s goods. Similarly, import demand may 
be expected to depend on the price of imports relative to domestic substitutes and on the level 
of domestic income. If the price and income elasticities of demand for exports and imports are 
assumed to be constant, we may write the export and import functions in the following (multi-
plicative) way:
X 5 Aa Pd
PfE b
h
ZP
(16.3)
and:
536
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
M 5 Ba 
PfE
Pd
 b
c
Yp
(16.4)
where Z measures ‘world’ income; Y measures domestic income; h is the price elasticity of demand 
for exports (< 0); P is the income elasticity of demand for exports (> 0); c is the price elasticity 
of demand for imports (< 0); π is the income elasticity of demand for imports (> 0); and A and B 
are constants.
Taking small rates of change of the variables in equations (16.3) and (16.4), we can see what the 
growth of exports and imports depends on:
x 5 h(pd 2 pf 2 e) 1 P(z)
(16.5)
and:
m 5 c(pf 1 e 2 pd) 1 p(y)
(16.6)
In other words, export growth depends on:
1.	 How fast domestic prices are changing relative to foreign prices, taking into account variations 
in the exchange rate (e), multiplied by the price elasticity of demand for exports.
2.	 How fast world income is changing, together with the value of the income elasticity of demand 
for exports.
We rule out here the possibility that developing countries can sell any amount of their goods on 
world markets at the going price, which would mean that the income elasticity of demand, and 
what is happening to world purchasing power, does not matter, and that export growth is simply 
supply determined. This may be true in the case of some commodities from some small countries, 
but the proposition that demand conditions do not matter for export performance does not 
stand up to empirical scrutiny as a general rule. There are very few countries that are pure price-
takers in international trade.
Likewise, import growth depends on:
1.	 How fast import prices are changing relative to domestic substitutes (taking account of ex-
change rate changes), multiplied by the price elasticity of demand for imports.
2.	 How fast domestic income (as a proxy for expenditure) is changing, together with the income 
elasticity of demand for imports.
Since the growth of imports depends on the growth of domestic income, if we substitute equa-
tions (16.5) and (16.6) into equation (16.2) (which gives the condition for a moving balance of pay-
ments equilibrium through time), we can derive an expression for a country’s growth of income 
that is consistent with current account equilibrium, which depends on certain key variables and 
parameters. Substitution of (16.5) and (16.6) into (16.2) gives:
pd 1 h(pd 2 pf 2 e) 1 P(z) 5 pf 1 c(pf 1 e 2 pd) 1 p(y) 1 e
(16.7)
so that:
y 5  
(1 1 h 1 c)(pd 2 pf 2 e) 1 P(z)
p

(16.8)
537
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
Before embarking on discussion, let us identify in words what this growth rate depends on, 
which must be binding if current account deficits cannot be financed:
1.	 It depends on the rate at which the real terms of trade are changing (pd − pf − e). The real terms 
of trade are the ratio of export to import prices measured in a common currency (Pd/Pf E). A 
rise in this ratio, that is (pd − pf − e) > 0, raises real income growth consistent with current ac-
count equilibrium (other things being constant), and a fall in this ratio lowers the balance of 
payments equilibrium growth rate. This is the pure terms of trade effect on income growth.
2.	 If the real terms of trade are changing, the growth rate depends on the price elasticities of 
demand for exports (h) and imports (c), which determine the magnitude of the volume re-
sponse of exports and imports to relative price changes. For surveys of estimating export and 
import demand functions, see Senhadji and Montenegro (1999) and Senhadji (1998).
3.	 One country’s growth depends on the growth rates of other countries (z) – which neatly illus-
trates the interdependence of the world economy – but the rate at which one country grows 
relative to others depends crucially on the income elasticity of demand for its exports (P), 
which depends on the tastes of foreign consumers, the characteristics of goods, and a whole 
host of non-price factors that determine the demand for goods in international trade. One 
of the main reasons why some countries have a healthier balance of payments and a higher 
growth rate than others is related to the characteristics of the goods they produce and export 
in world trade. What you export matters (Hausmann et al., 2007).
4.	 The growth rate depends on a country’s appetite for imports, as measured by π, the income 
elasticity of demand for imports. The higher is π, the lower the growth rate that is consistent 
with balance of payments equilibrium on the current account.
These factors show the rationale for agreements to prevent the terms of trade deteriorating for 
developing countries, for exchange rate policy, for international Keynesianism to maintain the 
growth of world income, and for policies to induce structural change – through export promo-
tion or import substitution – in order to raise the income elasticity of demand for exports and to 
reduce the income elasticity of demand for imports. Let us take up some of these issues in turn.
The terms of trade
The effect of terms of trade deterioration (import prices rising faster than export prices, other 
things remaining the same) is to worsen the balance of payments at a given rate of growth or, what 
amounts to the same thing, to reduce the rate of growth of income consistent with current account 
equilibrium. For example, if in equation (16.8), import prices were rising at 10% per annum while 
the price of exports was rising at only 5% per annum, this would mean a lower y than if the terms of 
trade were constant. In theory, this ‘terms of trade effect’ could be offset by a continual apprecia-
tion of the currency; that is, by a continual percentage fall in E(e < 0), but very few developing coun-
tries, if any, are in a position to appreciate their currencies even if they wanted to. Terms of trade 
stability in real terms must depend, or rely, on international commodity agreements to stabilize the 
prices of the exports of developing countries relative to the prices of the goods they import. Within 
this framework of analysis, the rationale for terms of trade agreements is apparent.
It is not clear, however, that terms of trade deterioration is always a bad thing, because 
what happens to export earnings and import payments, and hence to the balance of payments 
equilibrium growth rate, depends not only on changes in relative prices but also on the volume 
response of exports and imports to price changes. Since the price elasticities, h and c, are defined 
538
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
as negative, it can be seen from equation (16.8) that if their sum exceeds –1, pd < pf will mean 
that y is higher than would be the case if pd > pf . In other words, the export and import volume 
response to domestic export prices rising more slowly than import prices is sufficient to offset the 
fact that more has to be paid for a given volume of imports relative to exports. If, however, the 
price elasticity of demand for the exports of a developing country is low because of the nature 
of the product in question (for example, a primary product), and the price elasticity of demand 
for imports is also low because the imports are necessities, the balance of payments will worsen 
if the terms of trade deteriorate, and growth will have to be constrained for the preservation of 
balance of payments equilibrium. In these circumstances, commodity agreements assume great 
importance and it would be beneficial if the ratio of export prices to import prices were to rise. 
In Chapter 15, we considered various commodity schemes aimed at stabilizing export prices, or 
changing the relative price of exports and imports. We also noted that this will not necessarily 
stabilize export earnings if there are ﬂuctuations in export supply. The international response 
to this has been to devise schemes to compensate for loss of export earnings. In the past, the 
IMF operated a Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility to cover shortfalls of export 
earnings, but now countries must use other emergency financing facilities (see below).
Another argument for stabilizing the export prices of developing countries and maintaining 
their incomes is that price and income instability tend to depress the world economy as a whole 
and the developing countries with it, given the interdependence between countries in the world 
economy. Falling prices and incomes in developing countries reduce the purchasing power over 
industrial goods, inducing recession, while rising commodity prices may also induce recession 
by raising the price of manufactured goods and inducing deﬂation in developed countries. For 
the smooth growth of the world economy, there is a lot to be said for attempting to stabilize the 
prices of primary products so that the purchasing power of the producers and exporters of these 
commodities grows in line with supply. One suggestion is that Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) (see 
below) might be used to purchase primary products in order to stabilize their price in times of 
glut, on the lines of Keynes’ ‘commod control’ scheme (see Chapter 15).
The exchange rate and devaluation
Now suppose that export prices do rise more quickly than import prices, improving the terms of 
trade, but that the sum of the price elasticities of demand for exports and imports exceeds unity, 
what then? This will worsen the balance of payments and reduce the balance of payments equi-
librium growth rate. It is in these circumstances that exchange rate depreciation may become 
relevant, and is often resorted to. It can be seen from equation (16.8) that if a country’s rate of 
price increase is above that of other countries (pd > pf), this can, in principle, be compensated for 
by allowing the exchange rate to depreciate continually (e > 0) by the difference between pd and 
pf in order to hold ‘competitiveness’ steady. The conventional approach to balance of payments 
adjustment, and the policy pursued relentlessly by the IMF in countries experiencing balance 
of payments difficulties, is downward adjustment of the exchange rate. Note, however, that the 
rationale of such a policy presupposes a number of things:
•
• That the source of the difficulties is price uncompetitiveness.
•
• That the price elasticities are ‘right’ (that is, they sum to greater than unity) for a depreciation 
to reduce the imbalance.
•
• That the real terms of trade (or the real exchange rate) can be changed by devaluation.
539
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
A fall in the nominal exchange rate, however, that is, e > 0, may lead either to a fall in Pf (pf < 0) or 
a rise in Pd(pd > 0), both of which would nullify the effect of the devaluation (see equation (16.8)). 
A fall in Pf might come about if foreign suppliers desired to maintain their competitiveness as the 
devaluing country became more competitive. This is known as pricing to market; that is, foreign 
exporters reduce their markups in response to nominal exchange rate changes in order to remain 
competitive in world markets. A rise in Pd may come about as the domestic price of imports 
rises as a result of devaluation, which is then followed by a domestic wage–price spiral. Either 
way, within a short space of time, relative prices measured in a common currency may revert to 
their former level and devaluation will have been ineffective in this respect. Edwards (1989) has 
looked at the effectiveness of devaluation in reducing a country’s real exchange rate. He studied 
39 cases of devaluation in 25 developing countries in the period 1962–82, and found that, in most 
cases, devaluation had been eroded by domestic inﬂation within three years. Devaluation must 
be backed by restrictive monetary and fiscal policies if it is to be effective, but this can lead to 
un­
employment. A detailed case study of Mexico by Kamin and Rogers (2000) shows that devalua­
tion has nearly always been associated with high inﬂation and economic contraction.
Note also that a one-shot devaluation or depreciation of the currency cannot put a country 
on a permanently higher growth path that is consistent with balance of payments equilibrium. 
Currency depreciation would have to be continuous (that is, e > 0 permanently) for this to hap-
pen, unless devaluation can somehow induce favourable structural changes at the same time. 
Countries must look very carefully at the prevailing conditions before embracing currency devalu-
ation as a panacea for the relief of balance of payments constrained growth. There are three major 
worries.
First, raising the domestic price of imported goods can be a highly inﬂationary policy for an 
open economy that is heavily dependent on imports, as many developing countries have discov-
ered to their cost, particularly in Latin America, and some countries have had the courage to resist 
IMF support, which has been conditional on devaluation. In the eyes of some, the acronym IMF 
stands for (I)nﬂation, (M)isery and (F)amine.
Second, depreciation can be dangerous because it prematurely shifts resources into the trad-
able goods sector, where productivity may be lower than in the non-tradable goods sector. This is 
argued forcefully by Yotopoulos (1996), who believes that there is a tendency for the real exchange 
rate to be undervalued because of weakness on the capital account of the balance of payments, 
depressing the nominal exchange rate. In the early stages of development, developing countries 
should therefore protect the nominal exchange rate from depreciation through the use of con-
trols and intervention in the foreign exchange market, and only start to liberalize once the foreign 
exchange market has become more fully developed and currencies are not regarded as ‘soft’ by 
the outside world. In the 33 countries studied by Yotopoulos (1996), there was a negative relation 
between changes in the real exchange rate and the growth of per capita income for most of the 
1970s and 1980s (holding other factors constant).
Third, the effect of currency devaluation is to make countries more competitive in the range of 
goods that were the source of their balance of payments difficulties in the first place. A devalued 
currency might encourage export sales of new (manufactured) goods with a high price elasticity 
in world trade, but it might be inappropriate for the traditional range of goods produced and 
exported with a low price elasticity of demand. For example, if a country is a large supplier and a 
price-maker in world markets, currency devaluation coupled with low price elasticity will reduce 
export earnings. If the country is a price-taker, devaluation will raise the domestic price of the 
commodity and cause inﬂation. It is true that production for export will become more profitable 
540
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
and might encourage a greater supply response, but there are other less inﬂationary ways to 
encourage supply than devaluation. The different types of exchange rate systems available in 
developing countries are discussed below.
The IMF supply-side approach to devaluation
Devaluation, as well as permitting a reduction in the foreign currency price of exports, may also 
increase the profitability of exporting, by raising the price of tradable goods relative to the price 
of non-tradables, and by providing exporters with more domestic currency per unit of foreign 
exchange earned. The IMF, having conceded that the price elasticity of demand for many of 
the goods exported and imported by developing countries (particularly as a group) is low, now 
increasingly uses this supply-side argument as a justification for devaluation. If output is stimu-
lated, this will, to a certain extent, also mitigate the contraction of aggregate monetary demand 
that results from devaluation and any accompanying expenditure-reducing policies.
The IMF supply-side approach to devaluation was first articulated in print by Nashashibi (1980) 
with reference to the Sudan. The approach first requires the calculation of foreign exchange earn-
ings per unit of domestic resources employed for a range of tradable goods. Export (and import 
substitute) activities can then be arranged on a profitability scale and, according to the supply-
side argument, the appropriate devaluation is the one that goes down the scale far enough to 
ensure the profitability of traditional exports, as well as (perhaps) to encourage new activities. 
Thus, if the current exchange rate for the Sudan was, say, US$2 to S£1 and foreign exchange earn-
ings per unit of domestic resources were calculated to be less than this for most commodities, it 
would clearly be unprofitable to produce for export, and the exchange rate should be devalued 
to bring the production of tradables within the margin of profitability. Foreign exchange earnings 
per unit of domestic resources are measured as:
C 5  (PxX 2 PmM)r
PdD

(16.9)
where X refers to exports, Px is the world price of exports in domestic currency, M is the quantity 
of imported inputs, Pm is the price of imported inputs in domestic currency, D is the amount of 
domestic resources used in production, Pd is the price of domestic inputs and r is the exchange 
rate measured as the foreign price of domestic currency. If C > r, production is not profitable at 
the existing exchange rate.
It is clear from equation (16.9) that if devaluation is to improve profitability, the rise in (PxX − 
PmM)/PdD must be more than the reduction in r. Unfortunately, this cannot be taken for granted. 
It depends on the response of PxX, PmM, Pd and D to the change in r. The implicit assumptions 
underlying the approach are that developing countries are price-takers, so that Px will rise in 
proportion to the devaluation, that X will increase, that M will decrease, and that these favour-
able effects will not be offset by rises in Pm and PdD. In practice, there may not be a complete 
‘pass through’ of devaluation to export prices (Px), the elasticity of export supply may be very 
low because of structural rigidities and factor immobility, and the elasticity of import prices 
and domestic prices may be very high. The end result may be that the profitability of export-
ing remains largely unchanged. This was the conclusion of a detailed study of devaluations in 
the Sudan by Nureldin-Hussain and Thirlwall (1984), which looked at the profitability of cotton, 
groundnuts, sesame and gum arabic.
541
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
The Sudan and many other developing countries fall into the ‘rigid country’ classification 
distinguished by Branson (1983) in his useful taxonomic discussion of trade structures and 
devaluation. ‘Rigid’ countries are those that produce agricultural-based raw materials with low 
supply elasticities and whose demand for imports is very inelastic in the short run, particularly for 
imports used as intermediate inputs. In addition, the price elasticity of demand for exports may 
be high but not infinite, and real wages may be sticky. In these circumstances, devaluation may be 
a second best policy compared with ‘structural’ intervention to raise foreign exchange earnings 
per unit of domestic inputs.
The growth of world income and structural change
Now let us turn to the growth of world income: z in equation (16.8). There is nothing that indi-
vidual poor countries can do about the growth of world income, but since all countries are linked 
through trade, the interdependence of countries and the importance of global prosperity is only 
too apparent. This should be the overriding function of supranational institutions and mech­
anisms: to keep world income and trade buoyant in the face of exogenous shocks and to avoid 
the beggar-thy-neighbour policies that characterized the 1930s, when the whole world economy 
slumped. The purpose of the IMF was to avoid a repetition of the 1930s – to help countries in 
balance of payments difficulties and to avoid recourse to widespread protectionism, which can 
export unemployment from one country to another in a downward spiral. This is the same pur-
pose that underlies various schemes for the recycling of export surpluses and for managed trade; 
that is, to relieve the balance of payments constraint on growth in countries that tend to have a 
chronic deficit while other countries are in perpetual surplus. This was a major theme of the 1980 
Brandt Report discussed in Chapter 1, and the major concern of countries during the financial and 
economic crisis that hit the world economy in 2008.
While individual countries have no control over the growth of world income, they do have 
some control over the income elasticity of demand for their exports, which determines how fast 
exports grow as a result of world income growth. Likewise, countries have some control over the 
income elasticity of demand for imports, because both these parameters are a function of the 
type and characteristics of the goods being produced for sale in international trade. Thus, they are 
a function of the industrial and trade strategy being pursued.
In Chapter 15, we discussed export promotion versus import substitution strategies. Import 
substitution is designed to lower the import elasticity, but there is a limit to import substitution, 
and the policy itself may lower the export elasticity at the same time by creating a rigid and ineffi-
cient industrial structure. A much more fruitful strategy, which has been pursued relentlessly and 
successfully by several Southeast Asian countries, is to concentrate on raising the export elasticity, 
which may, at the same time, reduce the import elasticity if the goods produced for export also 
compete with imports.
Application of the balance of payments constrained growth model
How well does the balance of payments constrained growth model outlined in equations (16.1)–
(16.8) fit the growth experience of developing countries? Or, to put it another way, how well does 
equation (16.8) predict the growth performance of developing countries? To answer this question, 
it is convenient to simplify the model by assuming either that the sum of the price elasticities of 
542
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
demand (h + c) does not differ significantly from unity, in which case equation (16.8) reduces 
to y = Pz/π, and/or that relative prices in international trade do not change in the long run (or 
the real exchange rate remains constant), in which case equation (16.8) reduces to y = Pz/π = x/π. 
This latter result is often referred to as the dynamic Harrod trade multiplier result, because it is 
the dynamic analogue of the static Harrod trade multiplier result Y = X/m, where Y is the level of 
income, X is the level of exports, m is the marginal propensity to import, and 1/m is the foreign 
trade multiplier (Harrod, 1933). Prima facie evidence that a country is balance of payments con-
strained in its growth performance would be to find that its actual growth is close to or just above 
its balance of payments equilibrium growth rate (financed by sustainable long-run capital inﬂows 
– see below), combined with unemployed domestic resources.
A number of studies have applied this simple model to individual or groups of developing 
countries, and most are supportive that GDP growth can be predicted from the ratio of export 
growth to the income elasticity of demand for imports. McCombie and Thirlwall (1994, 1997) give 
a survey of studies up to 1996, McCombie and Thirlwall (2004) reprint 18 studies with an intro-
ductory survey up to 2003, and Thirlwall (2011) lists over 40 studies in a history and overview of 
the balance of payments-constrained growth model. Recent country studies include Nell (2003) 
for South Africa, Razmi (2005) for India, Britto and McCombie (2009) for Brazil, and Felipe et al. 
(2010) for Pakistan. Recent studies for groups of countries include Perraton (2003) for 51 develop-
ing countries, Pacheco-López and Thirlwall (2006) for 17 Latin American countries, Gouvea and 
Lima (2010) for 4 Asian and 4 Latin American countries, and Gouvea and Lima (2013) for a panel 
of 90 countries. Case example 16.1 applies the model to Latin American countries.
Studies are supportive of the model for two main reasons:
1.	 It is shown overwhelmingly that real exchange rate changes are not an efficient balance of 
payments adjustment weapon; it is income that adjusts to preserve balance of payments equi-
librium.
2.	 Capital flows make no substantial difference to the prediction of the current balance model 
because there is a limit to the current account deficit to GDP ratio that countries can sustain.
The results of these studies add weight to the idea and importance of export-led growth, dis-
cussed in Chapter 15.
Countries
Actual GDP 
growth (y) (%)
Export growth 
(x) (%)
Income elasticity 
of demand for 
imports (π)
Predicted balance of 
payments constrained 
growth rate (x/π) (%)
Argentina
1.33
6.07
3.66
1.66
Bolivia
1.89
3.46
1.82
1.90
Brazil
2.70
8.07
1.59
5.08
Chile
5.50
8.62
2.03
4.24
Costa Rica
3.94
7.38
2.27
3.25
Dominican Rep
.4.23
7.84
0.92
8.52
Ecuador
2.57
5.38
1.83
2.94
EI Salvador
1.66
5.03
2.47
2.04
Case example 16.1
Application of the balance of payments constrained growth model to 17 
Latin American countries, 1977–2002
543
Capital ﬂows
So far we have assumed growth to be constrained by the necessity to preserve current account 
equilibrium on the balance of payments. In practice, of course, countries are allowed to run defi-
cits, sometimes for substantial periods of time, financed by capital inﬂows from abroad from a 
variety of sources. The extent to which the value of imports can exceed the value of exports to 
finance a correspondingly higher level of income is determined by the net level of capital inﬂows. 
Thus, we may write the equation for the overall balance of payments as:
PdX 1 C 5 PfME
(16.10)
where C measures net capital inﬂows (including reductions in foreign exchange reserves) in 
domestic currency. Taking the rates of change of this identity gives:
E
R (pd 1 x) 1  C
R (c) 5 pf 1 m 1 e	

(16.11)
where E/R and C/R represent the proportion of total receipts to finance the import bill that come 
from export earnings (E) and capital inﬂows (C), respectively. If we now substitute our expressions 
for x and m (equations (16.5) and (16.6)) into equation (16.11), we can solve for the growth rate 
associated with overall balance of payments equilibrium. This rate will depend on all the factors 
already mentioned, and on the rate of growth of real capital inﬂows (c − pd). On substitution, we 
obtain:
y 5  
(1 1  E
R h 1 c)(pd 2 pf 2 e) 1  E
R (P3z4) 1  C
R (c 2 pd)
p

(16.12)
Countries
Actual GDP 
growth (y) (%)
Export growth 
(x) (%)
Income elasticity 
of demand for 
imports (π)
Predicted balance of 
payments constrained 
growth rate (x/π) (%)
Guatemala
2.93
2.14
3.78
0.57
Honduras
3.41
2.44
1.41
1.73
Mexico
3.30
11.38
3.17
3.59
Nicaragua
0.45
1.40
0.97
1.44
Paraguay
3.73
7.01
2.48
2.83
Peru
1.93
5.25
1.56
3.37
Uruguay
1.43
4.05
2.13
1.90
Venezuela
1.13
1.74
3.76
0.46
Source: Pacheco-López and Thirlwall, 2006.
Case example 16.1
Application of the balance of payments constrained growth model to 17 
Latin American countries, 1977–2002 – (continued)
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
544
This model is known as the extended version of the dynamic Harrod trade multiplier result 
(that is, extended to allow for capital ﬂows). Apart from the weight, E/R, attached to the two 
export elasticities, h and P, the only difference between equation (16.12) and our earlier result in 
equation (16.8) is the addition of the last term (c − pd), which measures the growth of real capital 
inﬂows (the growth of the nominal ﬂows, c, minus the rate of domestic inﬂation, pd). A positive 
growth of capital inﬂows will allow a country to grow faster than would be the case if it was con-
strained to maintain balance of payments equilibrium on the current account. On the other hand, 
it must be said that a continually positive rate of growth of capital inﬂows implies an ever-growing 
burden of debt, which is not sustainable in the long run. Thus, running current account deficits 
to finance growth is not a feasible option in the long run, and other long-run strategies must be 
pursued that relate to the determinants of the growth rate consistent with current account equi-
librium. For the original development of this model, see Thirlwall and Nureldin-Hussain (1982).
This model has been applied by Nureldin-Hussain (1999) to a sample of African and Asian 
countries over the period 1970–90, with interesting results (Table 16.1). Each country’s growth 
rate (column 1) is disaggregated into three components according to equation (16.12). The first 
is the terms of trade effect, the second is the export volume effect, and the third is the effect on 
growth of real capital inﬂows. It can be seen that the model fits remarkably well for most coun-
tries, but the contribution of the different effects differs between countries, and between the two 
continents of Africa and Asia. Africa has grown much more slowly than Asia, on average, and over 
one-half of Africa’s growth (excluding that arising from oil exports) has been financed by capital 
inﬂows. Movements in the terms of trade have also had an adverse effect on growth in Africa. In 
Asia, by contrast, a much higher proportion of growth has been permitted by the rapid growth of 
exports, and terms of trade movements have had a favourable effect on growth.
Table 16.1  Estimates of extended version of dynamic Harrod foreign trade multiplier, 1970–90 
(annual percentage average)
Actual 
growth 
rate
Terms of 
trade effect 
(A)
Export 
volume 
effect (B)
Real capital 
inﬂow 
effect (C)
Predicted 
growth rate 
= (A) + (B) 
+ (C)
African countries
Egypt
6.90
−2.37
4.36
7.31
9.30
Congo, Dem. Rep.
6.59
  0.42
3.88
2.38
6.67
Kenya
6.24
−0.50
1.62
5.59
6.71
Mauritius
5.80
  0.92
5.13
0.19
6.23
Tunisia
5.69
  0.87
5.24
1.48
7.59
Burundi
5.60
  1.69
3.21
    −1.26
3.65
Cameroon
5.50
−1.12
7.08
0.00
5.97
Gabon
5.10
  0.49
6.81
     −0.04
7.33
Algeria
4.90
10.15
4.21
  −8.72
5.64
Morocco
4.62
−1.34
2.83
3.47
4.96
Côte d’Ivoire
4.50
  0.39
4.23
0.81
5.43
Lesotho
4.40
−3.43
6.62
1.55
4.74
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
545
Table 16.1  Estimates of extended version of dynamic Harrod foreign trade multiplier, 1970–90 
(annual percentage average)
Actual 
growth 
rate
Terms of 
trade effect 
(A)
Export 
volume 
effect (B)
Real capital 
inﬂow 
effect (C)
Predicted 
growth rate 
= (A) + (B) 
+ (C)
Burkina Faso
4.20
−5.17
3.03
5.63
3.50
Somalia
3.40
−1.10
0.18
5.00
4.07
Zimbabwe
3.23
−2.40
2.23
   −1.24
   −1.41
Sudan
3.10
  0.14
1.13
1.92
3.20
Benin
2.90
  1.44
0.96
1.35
3.75
Tanzania
2.90
0.33
    −0.55
5.01
4.79
Togo
2.90
  0.08
2.31
0.61
3.00
Senegal
2.67
  0.23
1.56
1.05
2.83
Nigeria
2.50
  2.37
1.28
   −1.17
2.48
South Africa
2.42
−1.03
1.32
7.74
8.03
Mauritania
2.30
  0.68
1.58
0.42
2.69
Ethiopia
2.20
−0.09
0.74
2.53
3.17
Sierra Leone
1.58
−0.23
    −0.67
2.65
1.75
Zambia
1.40
−0.31
    −1.29
0.58
   −1.02
Ghana
1.40
−3.81
0.15
2.88
   −0.79
Niger
0.81
−5.07
1.79
3.47
0.20
Madagascar
0.48
−0.10
0.06
0.95
0.91
Average
3.66
−0.27
2.45
1.80
3.98
Average excluding oil exporters
3.40
−0.84
1.99
2.49
3.64
Asian countries
Korea, Rep. of
9.11
−0.81
     13.47
   −2.49
   10.17
Hong Kong
9.07
−0.07
8.34
1.01
9.28
Indonesia
10.76
1.82
3.18
5.76
7.58
China
8.20
−0.02
6.43
0.26
6.67
Malaysia
7.08
−0.69
6.60
2.21
8.12
Thailand
6.80
0.96
5.45
2.61
9.02
Pakistan
5.04
−0.44
4.28
4.40
8.24
India
4.31
−0.85
3.16
1.96
4.27
Sri Lanka
4.30
−0.65
2.33
3.00
4.68
Japan
4.20
−1.42
9.73
−4.63
3.68
Philippines
3.70
0.22
2.00
0.26
2.48
Average
6.60
−0.18
5.91
1.31
6.74
Average excluding Japan and Korea
6.58
0.03
4.46
2.39
6.70
Source: Based on Nureldin-Hussain, 1999.
– (continued)
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
546
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Exchange rate systems for developing countries
All countries have a wide choice of exchange rate systems, ranging from completely fixed to freely 
ﬂoating, with a number of options in between. Which system a developing country chooses must 
depend on its circumstances at the time, what exchange rate arrangements other countries are using, 
and the long-run goals of economic policy. For example, a country may wish to pursue exchange rate 
stability because of the instability and perceived disadvantages of ﬂoating rates, in which case it will 
wish to choose some form of fixed exchange rate regime. Alternatively, a country may wish to use 
its exchange rate to achieve various real objectives in the domestic economy, such as a faster rate of 
growth and full employment, and therefore sets a target for the real exchange rate. With changing 
domestic and foreign prices, a real exchange rate target will require frequent variations in the nom­
inal exchange rate, in which case the country will wish to choose some form of ﬂexible exchange rate 
regime. On the other hand, if inﬂation is the most serious problem within a country, currency depre-
ciation to maintain a given real exchange rate may simply exacerbate inﬂation, and a country may 
wish to anchor its currency to that of another country or even adopt the currency of another coun-
try in order to gain monetary credibility. This would be an extreme form of exchange rate pegging.
There is also the question of capital ﬂows. If a country has liberalized its capital markets and 
the capital account of the balance of payments, and capital is free to move in and out, it will be 
difficult, if not impossible, for a country to pursue an exchange rate target and operate an inde-
pendent monetary policy at the same time. This is called the impossible trinity. Capital outﬂows, 
for example, will cause a currency to depreciate in value. The only effective way to stop this is to 
raise domestic interest rates, which depress the internal economy. The reverse dilemma occurs 
with capital inﬂows. The only way to reconcile internal and external equilibrium is either to con-
trol capital movements, or to allow the exchange rate to ﬂoat. Theoretically, free ﬂoating allows a 
country to pursue a completely independent monetary policy geared to the goals of the domestic 
economy, but, in practice, no country is completely indifferent to the value of its exchange rate, 
particularly as it is a characteristic of the foreign exchange market that exchange rates may con-
siderably overshoot their true ‘equilibrium’ value. These are just a few examples of the consider­
ations and conditions that countries need to bear in mind in choosing an exchange rate regime. 
For useful surveys of exchange rate policy in developing countries, see Argy (1990), Frenkel (1999), 
Fischer (2001), Ghosh et al. (2002) and Ghosh and Ostey (2009). The spectrum of alternatives, 
from hard pegs to ﬂoating, is given in Table 16.2.
Each country must find its own solution, in the light of its own circumstances. The IMF gener-
ally respects a country’s choice of exchange rate regime, and gives advice to support that choice. 
The different options are discussed below, but the historical experience of the past 30 years or so 
points to three broad policy conclusions (Fischer, 2001):
1.	 Intermediate positions between hard pegs and ﬂoating (what might be called ‘soft’ pegs) are 
not sustainable without capital controls.
Table 16.2  Types of exchange rate regime
Hard pegs
Intermediate regimes
Floating
Currency boards
Pegged exchange rates
Free ﬂoat
Currency unions
Crawling peg
Managed ﬂoat
Dollarization, or adopting the currency of another 
country
Exchange rate band
Crawling band
547
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
2.	 While countries have shifted from intermediate regimes to either end of the spectrum (more 
towards ﬂoating than hard pegs), a wide range of ﬂexible rate arrangements still remains pos-
sible.
3.	 Countries are not indifferent to exchange rate movements, so independent ﬂoating is not an 
option and can be dangerous.
Let us now brieﬂy consider the different types of exchange rate regime listed in Table 16.2, and 
their advantages and disadvantages.
A currency board is an extreme form of hard peg that requires each unit of a country’s cur-
rency to be backed by an equal amount of a reserve currency, such as the US dollar. The cur-
rency board system was widely practised in Africa under British rule before independence. More 
recently, Argentina decided to anchor its currency to the US dollar in this way but went into seri-
ous recession with the appreciation of the US dollar in 2000–01, and the currency peg was even-
tually abandoned. Linking a weak currency to a stronger currency can be a useful anti-inﬂation 
device to gain monetary credibility. Indeed, the system is reminiscent of the old gold standard 
system, where the currency had to be backed up by gold, with the money supply expanding and 
contracting according to the balance of payments and changes in international reserves. The two 
major disadvantages of currency board systems are:
1.	 The credit for entrepreneurs to invest is not elastic to the needs of trade (because it depends 
on the availability of foreign exchange reserves),
2.	 If the reserve currency appreciates in value, so too does the currency that is linked to it. This 
can cause serious problems of competitiveness with other trading partners, and damage ex-
ports and the balance of payments.
Another extreme form of hard peg is a currency union, where countries decide to adopt 
a common currency, so that, by definition, exchange rates between member countries of the 
union disappear. Countries may decide to enter a currency union if they feel that multiple 
currencies, exchange rate volatility and uncertainty are seriously damaging trade, and that 
the overall benefits of surrendering monetary independence exceed the costs. The condi-
tions for an optimal currency area, in which the benefits to the members exceed the costs, 
are that:
1.	 Economic cycles should be synchronized and economic shocks symmetrical so that a single 
monetary policy is suitable for all members.
2.	 Labour and capital are freely mobile.
3.	 Fiscal transfer mechanisms exist to help disadvantaged regions.
4.	 Multiple currencies are seriously damaging trade.
It is never easy for a country to know whether the benefits will exceed the costs, and decisions are 
often taken on political, as well as economic, grounds. It is important to stress, however, that the 
fact that a country has no exchange rate to defend vis-à-vis its partners does not mean that the 
country avoids balance of payments problems; they just show up in a different form (Thirlwall, 
2007). If plans to import exceed plans to export, balance of payments difficulties will manifest 
themselves in falling output and rising unemployment, unless there are compensating capital 
transfers between the members of the currency union. The francophone countries of West Africa 
are part of a currency union that now uses the euro as the common currency, and the eurozone, 
the largest currency union in the world, comprises 19 (of the 28) countries of the EU with the euro 
as its common currency.
548
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Another form of hard peg is to simply adopt the currency of another country, referred to as 
dollarization in the case of adopting the US dollar. As far as monetary and exchange rate policy 
is concerned, the country becomes an adjunct to the country issuing the currency. This is a last 
resort for countries unable to manage their own affairs. In recent years, Ecuador and El Salvador 
have dollarized.
Pegged exchange rates are fixed exchange rates, but adjustable. This was the system set up 
at Bretton Woods in 1944, by which each country’s currency was pegged to the US dollar, so 
that all bilateral rates of exchange between countries were also pegged. The system was called 
the ‘adjustable peg system’, however, because if countries found themselves in fundamental bal-
ance of payments disequilibrium, with unsustainable deficits, they were allowed to adjust the rate 
of exchange with the dollar and therefore other currencies too. The system gave exchange rate 
stability, and avoided competitive devaluation by countries that characterized the beggar-thy-
neighbour policies of the 1930s, but proved difficult to sustain in a world of increasing capital 
mobility. This is the problem for any country wishing to peg its exchange rate. If a currency is 
under pressure, the existence of a peg gives a one-way option for speculators. The currency mar-
kets anticipate that the peg can be adjusted only downwards, which then makes the currency 
vulnerable to speculative attacks. With large amounts of capital freely mobile, it is very difficult 
to maintain a pegged rate while attempting to pursue an independent monetary policy, because 
the interest rate has to be used to defend the currency. It was largely speculative capital ﬂows, 
and the inability of the USA to meet the promise of exchanging dollars for gold, that caused the 
international monetary system established at Bretton Woods to break down in 1972. Since then, 
other countries that have tried to peg rates have met with a similar fate. To quote Fischer (2001): 
‘in recent years, fixed or pegged exchange rates have been a major factor in every major emerging 
market financial crisis – Mexico at the end of 1994; Thailand, Indonesia and Korea in 1997; Russia 
and Brazil in 1998; Argentina and Turkey in 2000 … and 2001’.
If countries do decide to peg their exchange rate, there are three broad choices of peg:
1.	 Pegging to a single currency such as the dollar, pound or euro.
2.	 Pegging to an individually tailored basket of currencies reﬂecting the trade of the country con-
cerned.
3.	 Pegging to a common basket of currencies such as the SDR (special drawing rights), which, 
since 2016, has been a weighted basket of the world’s five major currencies – the dollar, the yen, 
the euro, the pound and the Chinese yuan (renminbi).
The question is: Which peg to choose? This will depend on what the country is trying to achieve. 
If it is macroeconomic stability, pegging against just one currency is unlikely to be optimal since 
movements in a country’s exchange rate may bear no relation to its own balance of payments, but 
instead will move according to the balance of payments of the country that the currency is pegged 
to. Ideally, the pegged rate needs to balance out the effect of individual bilateral exchange rate 
changes over the economy as a whole. This requires pegging to a basket of currencies, where the 
weights should reﬂect the direction and elasticity of total trade (exports and imports) between 
the country and its trading partners. Pegging to a common basket of currencies, such as the SDR, 
is likely to be superior to pegging to just one currency, but inferior to an individually tailored 
basket of currencies.
To preserve the advantages of a fixed exchange rate, but to minimize the speculative pressures 
that can build up with the prospect of currency depreciation, there are various, more ﬂexible, 
intermediate exchange rate regimes.
549
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
One possibility is a crawling peg. Under a crawling peg, a country maintains its pegged 
exchange rate within agreed margins at a level equal to the moving average of the market exchange 
rate over a previously agreed time period. This allows a country’s currency to drift gradually lower 
if circumstances warrant, but avoids the upheaval of devaluation under an adjustable peg system 
and the possibility of excessive depreciation under free ﬂoating. To avoid speculation against the 
currency, the interest rate can be raised by a margin equal to the permitted rate of depreciation.
A variant of the crawling peg is an exchange rate band, whereby the country allows the 
exchange rate to vary within a specified range. A crawling band allows the exchange rate band 
itself to move over time.
The furthest extreme of ﬂexibility is to allow a currency to ﬂoat completely independently with-
out any intervention at all. This implies that the country is completely indifferent to its exchange rate. 
In practice, no country can be indifferent if it is concerned with macroeconomic stability. Exchange 
rates can overshoot wildly, which can be very disruptive, and a rapidly depreciating currency can be 
a serious source of inﬂation by raising the domestic price of imports. It also needs to be stressed that 
although free ﬂoating, by definition, guarantees equilibrium in the foreign exchange market (because 
the exchange rate is the price that equilibrates the supply and demand for foreign exchange), it does 
not guarantee equilibrium on the current account of the balance of payments because the demand 
elasticities for imports and exports may not be of the right order of magnitude. This may then involve 
the unsustainable build-up of debt if deficits are financed by foreign borrowing.
Although many countries claim to have moved towards greater exchange rate ﬂexibility in 
recent years, in practice, they intervene. This is called managed ﬂoating. Countries have no target 
rate of exchange, no peg, no official band, but they intervene on a daily basis according to circum-
stances. Managing the exchange rate is easier when there are controls on capital ﬂows. Capital 
controls insulated China from the exchange rate turmoil that hit many countries in Southeast 
Asia in 1997 (see Case example 16.2). In 1998, Malaysia imposed capital controls in order to man-
age its exchange rate more effectively (see Athukorala, 2001). For a short time, Chile imposed 
a tax on capital inﬂows so that it could operate a policy of monetary contraction to control 
inﬂation without leading to destabilizing capital inﬂows.
The financial crisis in East Asia erupted in July 1997 when pressure on the Thai baht 
became so severe that the government was compelled to cease defending the fixed 
exchange rate and to allow the currency to float, in order to avoid defaulting on its 
international obligations. There was rapid contagion throughout the region, leading 
to a collapse of the currencies of Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and 
Korea (the Asia-5) within a matter of weeks. Accompanying the currency collapse were 
steep falls in these countries’ stock markets, which spread to other economies such as 
Singapore and Hong Kong, whose currencies remained relatively stable. The turmoil 
rapidly turned into a major world financial crisis and not only had dramatic effects 
on the region’s growth performance, but also substantially reduced world economic 
growth. What happened in East Asia in 1997 provides an illuminating case study, and 
cautionary tale, of the danger to countries of attempting to run large balance of pay-
ments deficits financed by short-term capital inflows, while trying to maintain a fixed 
exchange rate.
continued overleaf
Case example 16.2
The 1997 East Asian financial crisis: a cautionary tale
550
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
The question is: Why did this region, previously described by economists and com-
mentators as representing a ‘growth miracle’, plunge into one of the world’s most ser­
ious postwar recessions? The answer is that, for some time, there had been a major 
imbalance in the external accounts of the Asia-5 countries, but no one warned of the 
danger, not even the IMF, who did not see the crisis coming. The deficits of 5% and 
more of GDP were being financed by shorter term volatile capital inflows. Volatile 
flows constituted over 60% of external financing in the years prior to 1997. The mas-
sive capital inflows led to imprudent lending by the domestic banks, and a rapid ex-
pansion of credit, leading to asset and property bubbles. The latter encouraged even 
further capital inflows. It became clear to investors that the exchange rate could not 
be maintained, and once market sentiment changed, a self-fulfilling prophecy devel-
oped, leading to a vicious circle of capital flight, falling exchange rates and a collapse 
in the regional stock exchanges. Once capital begins to move out of a region and the 
exchange rate begins to fall, no one wants to be caught holding assets valued in do-
mestic currency. The capital loss caused by a depreciating currency can far outweigh 
any possible gains in higher returns or in higher interest rates that are imposed to try 
to restore confidence.
The East Asian financial crisis exposed some fundamental weaknesses in the Asian 
growth process, although not the underlying factors that gave rise to rapid growth 
rates in the first place. Particularly, it showed the danger (and this is a warning to other 
countries) of the rapid liberalization of international capital flows before the domes-
tic banking system has developed sufficient regulatory control, and of financing ever-
growing balance of payments deficits relative to GDP by increasingly short-term capital 
flows. The balance of payments becomes the ultimate constraint on the growth per-
formance of nations.
Source: Based on McCombie and Thirlwall, 1999.
Case example 16.2
The 1997 East Asian financial crisis: a cautionary tale – continued
Finally, it needs to be said that an optimal exchange rate strategy for a developing coun-
try ought to recognize the dual structure of most countries and that a single exchange rate 
for all commodities may not be appropriate. Either a dual exchange rate is required, or 
some system of taxes and subsidies to achieve the same effect. A classic early reference argu-
ing the case for dual exchange rates is Kaldor (1964). Under a dual exchange rate system, 
a fixed (official) rate could apply to primary commodity exports (and to essential imports 
to keep their domestic price low) and a free (devalued) rate could apply to manufactured 
exports with a high price elasticity of demand (and to inessential imports). With a foreign 
exchange shortage, the free rate would produce a domestic price of foreign exchange well 
above the official rate. The higher the free rate, or the greater the degree of devaluation, 
the greater the stimulation of manufactured exports and the greater the discouragement of 
inessential imports.
The main administrative problem with dual exchange rates is to separate the two markets, 
to ensure that export proceeds from primary commodity exports are surrendered at the 
official rate and that foreign exchange bought at the official rate is used for essential imports. 
The former can be achieved through state marketing boards, the latter through strict licen­
sing. Currency auctions – selling foreign exchange for non-essential purposes to the highest 
551
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
bidder – is another form of dual (or multiple) exchange rate policy. In the early days of the 
IMF, dual and multiple exchange rates were discouraged and frowned upon as interfering 
with free trade and exchange, but in more recent years, greater tolerance has been shown.
Recent research on the relation between the exchange rate regime adopted by countries and 
the functioning of the real economy shows the following:
•
• Under pegged regimes, inﬂation is lower, the growth of output is not affected, but output vola-
tility is higher than under ﬂexible exchange rate regimes (Ghosh et al. 2002).
•
• Pegged regimes are more prone to currency crises than ﬂoating exchange rate regimes, par-
ticularly in countries more integrated with international financial markets, but intermediate 
regimes are even more prone to crisis than the bipolar extremes of hard pegs or free ﬂoating 
(Bubula and Otker-Robe, 2004).
•
• Countries with ﬂexible exchange rate regimes absorb terms of trade shocks more easily 
than countries with fixed exchange rate regimes, so that output is less volatile (Broda, 
2004).
So, trade-offs are involved. Pegged exchange rates are best for controlling inflation, but they 
constrain the use of other macroeconomic policies such as scope for countercyclical fiscal policy 
because agents fear that countries will intervene to control expected currency depreciation. 
Pegs also impede timely external adjustment so payments imbalances build up. Intermediate 
regimes deliver faster growth of output of about 0.5% per annum, but inflation is higher (Ghosh 
and Ostry, 2009). The countries currently pursuing different types of exchange rate regime are 
shown in Table 16.3. It can be seen that there is quite a variety of exchange rate systems in oper­
ation. Forty three countries still peg their currency to the US dollar in one form or another and 
26 countries peg to the euro. At the other end of the spectrum, 36 countries operate a managed 
float and 29 countries have free floating. Neither free floating nor managed floating mean that 
countries are indifferent to the exchange rate; merely that there is no formal peg to which the 
currencies are anchored.
Table 16.3  Countries classified by exchange rate regime, 2014
Exchange rate 
arrangement
Exchange rate anchor
US dollar (43)
Euro (26)
Composite (12)
Other (9)
No separate 
legal tender
Ecuador
El Salvador
Marshall
Islands
Micronesia
Palau
Panama
Timor-Leste 
Zimbabwe
Kosovo
Montenegro
San Marino
Kiribati
Tuvalu
Currency board
Djibouti
Hong Kong
SAR
ECCU
Antigua and
Barbuda
Dominica 
Grenada
St. Kitts and
Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent 
and the 
Grenadines
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Lithuania
Brunei
Darussalam
continued
552
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Table 16.3  Countries classified by exchange rate regime, 2014
Exchange rate 
arrangement
Exchange rate anchor
US dollar (43)
Euro (26)
Composite (12)
Other (9)
Conventional
peg
Aruba
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belize
CuraÇao 
and Sint 
Maarten 
Eritrea
Jordan
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
South Sudan 
Turkmenistan
United Arab
Emirates
Venezuela
Cabo Verde 
Comoros 
Denmark  
Sao Tome: and
Principe
WAEMU 
Benin 
Burkina Faso 
Cote 
d’Ivoire
Guinea-Bissau 
Mali
Niger
Senegal  
Togo
CEMAC 
Cameroon 
Central
African
Rep.
Chad
Rep. of
Congo 
Equatorial
Guinea 
Gabon
Fiji 
Kuwait 
Libya 
Morocco 
Samoa
Bhutan 
Lesotho 
Namibia 
Nepal 
Swaziland
Stabilized
arrangement
Guyana
Iraq
Kazakhstan 
Lebanon
Maldives
Suriname
Trinidad and
Tobago
FYR
Macedonia
Singapore 
Vietnam
Crawling peg
Nicaragua
Botswana
Crawl-like 
arrangement
Honduras
Jamaica
Croatia
Pegged exchange 
rate within 
horizontal bands
Tonga
Other managed 
arrangement
Cambodia 
Liberia
Algeria 
Iran 
Syria
Managed
Floating
Afghanistan 
Kenya 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Mozambique 
Albania 
Brazil 
Colombia 
Georgia
Ghana 
Hungary 
India 
Mauritius 
Mongolia 
Zambia
Papua New
Guinea 
Seychelles 
Siena Leone 
Tanzania 
Ukraine 
Uruguay
Iceland 
Indonesia
Israel
Korea 
Moldova 
New Zealand 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Romania 
Serbia 
South Africa 
 – continued
553
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
Table 16.3  Countries classified by exchange rate regime, 2014
Exchange rate 
arrangement
Exchange rate anchor
US dollar (43)
Euro (26)
Composite (12)
Other (9)
Thailand 
Turkey 
Uganda
Free floating
Australia 
Canada 
Chile
Japan 
Mexico 
Norway 
Poland 
Sweden 
United Kingdom
Somalia 
United States
EMU 
Austria 
Belgium 
Cyprus 
Estonia 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Ireland 
Italy 
Latvia 
Luxembourg 
Malta 
Netherlands 
Portugal 
Slovak Rep.
Slovenia
Spain
Source: IMF, 2014.
 – continued
The international monetary system and developing countries
The world’s international monetary system is governed largely by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), which was established at Bretton Woods in 1944 in the aftermath of the Great Depression of 
the 1920s and 1930s and in preparation for the postwar peace. There was a fear that the protection-
ism and beggar-thy-neighbour policies that characterized the interwar period would rear their ugly 
heads again, to the detriment of the world economy at large, if not all the individual countries within 
it. Thus, the IMF was originally conceived as an institution for stabilizing the world economy, rather 
than as an agency for development, providing short-term loans to member countries in temporary 
balance of payments difficulties. Responsibility for development was given to the IMF’s sister insti-
tution, the World Bank, established at the same time. Because the IMF was not allowed to create 
money, John Maynard Keynes (one of the architects of the IMF) used to complain (and joke) that 
his proposal for a bank had become a fund, and what was, in fact, a fund had been called a bank.
Over the years, however, and particularly in recent years, the role of the IMF has changed. It 
has increasingly become the bank manager of poor countries, and much more of a development 
agency, advancing longer term loans to cover what are now perceived as longer term structural 
balance of payments difficulties. The role of the World Bank has also been changing, and now it 
too provides loans as a means of balance of payments support (the traditional preserve of the IMF), 
for programmes of structural adjustment (see Chapter 14). In turn, the IMF instituted a Structural 
554
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Adjustment Facility in 1986, and an Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility in 1987 (see below). 
The roles of the IMF and the World Bank have almost merged, reﬂecting the fact that the balance 
of payments is the principal long-run constraint on the growth of output in developing countries.
The IMF and the World Bank also roughly agree on the same policies and reforms that should 
be applied in developing countries – often referred to as the Washington Consensus. The term 
‘Washington Consensus’ was originally coined by John Williamson of the Institute for International 
Economics in 1989 to refer to an agenda for reform in Latin America, which he believed the IMF 
and the World Bank would endorse (see Williamson 1990, 1993). The reforms quickly came to be 
seen as a model for the wider developing world. The package of reforms suggested by Williamson 
comprised the following:
•
• Fiscal discipline
•
• Redirection of public expenditure towards education, health and infrastructure investment
•
• Tax reform – broadening the tax base and cutting marginal tax rates
•
• Interest rates that are market determined and positive (but moderate) in real terms
•
• Competitive exchange rates
•
• Trade liberalization – replacement of quantitative restrictions with low and uniform tariffs
•
• Openness to foreign direct investment
•
• Privatization of state enterprises
•
• Deregulation – abolition of regulations that impede entry or restrict competition, except for 
those justified on safety, environmental and consumer protection grounds, and prudential 
oversight of financial institutions
•
• Legal security for property rights.
The Washington Consensus extols the virtues of the free market and free trade for the achievement 
of more rapid economic progress (see Taylor, 1997), but Williamson objects to the interpretation 
of it as ‘neoliberal’, because neoliberalism also embraces a political ideology relating to minimal 
state interference in economic and social affairs, low tax rates, individualism, and a general 
indifference to the income distribution produced by market forces.
The wisdom of the Washington Consensus was always a matter of dispute among economists, but 
its initial appeal did not last long because, in the 1990s, several developing countries that adopted 
the package of reforms, under pressure from the IMF and the World Bank, suffered severe finan-
cial and economic crises, which toppled governments, reduced living standards, and left millions of 
people worse off. Free-market forces turned out to be as disruptive and destructive as government 
regulations and controls. Economists now question the pace and sequencing of the deregulation 
and liberalization of markets, and call for stronger domestic institutions and policies to be put in 
place before countries open up to ﬂoods of imports and capital inﬂows. The need to mix institution-
building with the freeing of markets is sometimes called the post-Washington Consensus. However, 
the ideology and practical policy-making of the IMF and the World Bank have hardly changed.
One country that has resisted the pressure of the Washington Consensus is China. It has forged 
its own development strategy, the Beijing Consensus, which does not allow the economy to be 
buffeted by the unfettered forces of free-market capitalism, either domestic or international. It 
is becoming increasingly attractive to other (large) developing countries (e.g. Brazil) looking for 
an alternative approach to economic policy-making, which puts the needs of people first, not 
the interests of bankers and international speculators. China’s declared goal is to achieve fast, 
sustainable growth, combined with equity and poverty reduction. China recognizes that to 
achieve this requires a degree of economic independence to insulate it from turbulence in the 
world economy. This makes it cautious about free trade and the free movement of international 
capital, although not about attracting long-term foreign direct investment. China is fortunate to 
555
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
be large enough (and stable enough) to go its own way. Many developing countries are either too 
small, too vulnerable or too unstable to resist the orthodoxy because they are dependent on loan 
support from the IMF and the World Bank.
How the IMF works
The IMF has three main roles:
1.	 It oversees the international monetary system and monitors the economic and financial pol­
icies of its 189 member countries. As part of this surveillance process, which takes place at the 
global level and in individual countries, the IMF highlights possible risks to stability and advises 
on needed policy adjustments.
2.	 It helps its member countries design economic policies and manage their financial affairs more 
effectively by strengthening their human and institutional capacity through expert advice and 
training, which it calls ‘capacity development’.
3.	 It provides loans to member countries experiencing actual or potential balance of payments 
problems to help them rebuild their international reserves, stabilize their currencies, contin-
ue paying for imports, and restore conditions for strong economic growth, while correcting 
 
underlying problems.
The IMF is a source of four main forms of financial assistance, or liquidity, to developing countries:
•
• Drawings from the ordinary facilities provided by the IMF
•
• Drawings made under special facilities
•
• Facilities for low-income countries
•
• The periodic issue of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).
Members’ drawing rights, their share of SDR allocations, and indeed their subscription to the IMF 
and voting power are all based on quotas. Every member must subscribe to the IMF an amount 
equal to its quota – 25% in the form of reserve assets and the remainder in local currency. Initial 
quotas are based on a formula relating to the economic circumstances of individual countries, such 
as living standards, importance in world trade and so on, which are then modified in various ways in 
the light of the conditions and quotas of other countries. The USA has the largest quota, amounting 
at present to 83 billion SDRs out of the total value of quota subscriptions of 471 billion SDRs. When 
countries draw on the IMF, they buy the currency they need with their own currency, and when they 
repay, they repurchase their own currency with foreign currency acceptable to the IMF. The size of 
the quotas comes under continual review. The 14th General Review of Quotas took place in 2015.
The IMF may supplement its quota resources by borrowing any country’s currency. This was insti-
tutionalized by the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) in January 1962, which was a four-year 
arrangement concluded with ten industrialized countries. Since then, the GAB has been extended sev-
eral times. The IMF also borrows from the private capital market and makes bilateral deals with countries.
The IMF also borrows to finance special facilities as a means of recycling the balance of pay-
ments surpluses of some member countries. The IMF argues that while it has no desire to supplant 
ordinary commercial banks in the recycling process, its ability to advocate adjustment policies 
effectively and convincingly in deficit countries is enhanced by the capacity to make substantial 
financial resources available to member countries. Thus, while the IMF continues to place reliance 
on quota subscriptions as the main source of its finance, it is also in the market to borrow. Now 
that the IMF sees its role as providing larger amounts of finance over longer and longer periods 
556
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
for countries with chronically weak balance of payments in relation to their growth objectives, it 
has an ever-growing need for resources.
A country making use of the IMF’s resources is generally required to carry out a programme of 
balance of payments adjustment as a condition of support. This requirement is known as condi-
tionality and reﬂects the IMF principle that financing and adjustment must go hand in hand. What 
constitutes balance of payments equilibrium is not rigidly defined. It need not mean current account 
equilibrium, but the measure must be defined free of restrictions on trade and payments, in keeping 
with the underlying liberal free trade philosophy of the IMF. The enforced programmes of balance 
of payments adjustment typically consist of currency devaluation and restrictions on government 
expenditure and the money supply, coupled with the liberalization of trade and capital movements.
These conditionality practices, which were developed during the 1950s and 1960s under pres-
sure from the USA, have been severely criticized (see below) and have undergone continual review. 
They are harsh, but perhaps less harsh than they were. Countries are encouraged to approach the 
IMF early before payments problems become acute, and it recognizes the need for a longer adjust-
ment period. When helping countries to design adjustment programmes, the IMF is supposed 
to have due regard to the socioeconomic and political characteristics of the country concerned 
(although there is still not much evidence of this). The IMF now recognizes that balance of pay-
ments difficulties associated with an acceptable growth of output may have as much to do with 
the structural characteristics of a country as with relative price distortions and excessive govern-
ment expenditure. The emphasis has also shifted from demand contraction to supply-side policies 
to increase the efficiency of resource allocation and supply potential. For a comprehensive review 
of the evolution of the conditionality practices of the IMF, see Guitian (1982) and Dell (1981).
IMF lending
Table 16.4 shows the IMF’s major non-concessional lending facilities, and Table 16.5 shows the 
IMF’s concessional lending facilities for low-income countries. Currently, there are five major non-
concessional facilities. First, there is the Stand-By Arrangement (SBA), created in 1952 to provide 
short- to medium-term assistance to countries with short-term balance of payments difficulties. 
Normally, certain performance criteria relating to money supply targets and government expenditure 
must be met before resources are released. A strong programme is required to rectify balance of 
payments disequilibria, which almost always consists of deflation and depreciation of the exchange 
rate. Typically, an SBA covers a 12- to 18-month period, and repayments must be made within 3–5 
years of each drawing. Countries may draw up to 200% of quota annually and 600% cumulatively.
Second, there is the Extended Fund Facility (EFF), created in 1974 to provide longer term 
assistance to support countries’ structural reforms to address long-term balance of payments dif-
ficulties. The repayment schedule is longer, 4–10 years, but the conditions are stringent. The coun-
try must provide a detailed statement of policies and measures every 12 months. The resources 
are provided in instalments, with performance criteria attached. Nonetheless, the introduction 
of the EFF represented an important and significant shift in emphasis from viewing the balance 
of payments as a stabilization problem, to recognizing the balance of payments as a fundamental 
long-term constraint on growth that cannot be rectified in a short period of time by conventional 
means. Structural change is required.
In the wake of the 2007–09 global financial crisis, the IMF strengthened its lending policies 
through the creation of three new facilities: the Flexible Credit Line (FCL), the Precautionary 
and Liquidity Line (PLL) and the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) (see Table 16.4 for details).
557
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
Table 16.4  IMF’s non-concessional lending facilities
Credit facility  
(year adopted)
Purpose
Conditions
Access limits
Repayment  
schedule (years)
CREDIT TRANCHES AND EXTEND FUND FACICITY
Stand-By Arrangement  
(SBA) (1952)
Short- to medium-term 
assistance for countries 
with short-term balance 
of payments difficulties
Adopt policies that 
provide confidence that 
the member’s balance 
of payments difficulties 
will be resolved within a 
reasonable period
Annual: 200% of quota; 
cumulative: 600% of 
quota
3¼–5
Extended Fund Facility 
(EFF) (1974) (Extended 
Arrangements)
Longer term assistance 
to support members’ 
structural reforms to 
address long-term 
balance of payments 
difficulties
Adopt up to 4-year 
program, with structural 
agenda and annual 
detailed statement of 
policies for the next 12 
months
Annual: 200% of quota; 
cumulative: 600% of 
quota
4½–10
Flexible Credit Line 
(FCL) (2009)
Flexible instrument 
in the credit tranches 
to address all balance 
of payments needs, 
potential or actual
Very strong ex ante 
macroeconomic 
fundamentals, 
economic policy 
framework, and policy 
track record
No preset limit
3¼–5
Precautionary and 
Liquidity Line (PLL) 
(2011)
Instrument for countries 
with sound economic 
fundamentals and 
policies
Sound policy 
frameworks, external 
position, and market 
access, including 
financial sector 
soundness
250% of quota for 
6 months; 500% of 
quota available upon 
approval of 1- to 2-year 
arrangements; total of 
1,000% of quota after 12 
months of satisfactory 
progress
3¼–5
SPECIAL FACILITES
Rapid Financing 
Instrument (RFI) 
(2011)
Rapid financial 
assistance to all member 
countries facing an 
urgent balance of 
payments need
Efforts to solve balance 
of payments difficulties 
(may include prior 
actions)
Annual: 50% of quota 
cumulative: 100% of 
quota
3¼–5
Source: IMF, 2014.
In addition to the IMF’s ordinary lending facilities, there are three special lending facilities for 
low-income countries: the Extended Credit Facility (ECF), the Standby Credit Facility (SCF), 
and the Rapid Credit Facility (RCF), all related to protracted balance of payments difficulties (see 
Table 16.5 for details). Note that the ECF supersedes the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, 
which was set up in 1999 to assist poor countries facing persistent balance of payments problems, 
and was designed to work alongside the IMF and World Bank’s Heavily Indebted Poor Country 
Initiative (see Chapter 14) for debt relief for poor countries, and requires the preparation of a 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. This is still a requirement under the EFF.
Total IMF credit outstanding for all 189 IMF members in March 2016 was nearly 55 billion 
SDRs, having fallen from a peak of 96 billion SDRs in December 2012 in the wake of the world 
financial crisis.
558
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
Table 16.5  IMF concessional lending facilities to low-income countries
Extended Credit Facility 
(ECF)
Standby Credit Facility 
(SCF)
Rapid Credit Facility 
(RCF)
Objective
Help low-income 
countries achieve 
and maintain a stable 
and sustainable 
macroeconomic position 
consistent with strong 
and durable poverty 
reduction and growth
Very strong ex ante 
macroeconomic 
fundamentals, economic 
policy framework, and 
policy track record
Approved access 
available up front 
throughout the 
arrangement period, 
subject to a midterm 
review after 1 year
Purpose
Address protracted 
balance of payments 
problems
Resolve short-term 
balance of payments 
needs
Low-access financing to 
meet urgent balance of 
payments needs
Eligibility
Countries eligible under 
the Poverty Reduction 
and Growth Trust (PRG1)
Efforts to solve balance 
of payments difficulties 
(may include prior 
actions)
Outright purchases 
without the need for 
full-fledged program or 
reviews
Qualification
Protracted balance of 
payments problem; 
actual financing need 
over the course of the 
arrangement, though not 
necessarily when lending 
is approved or disbursed
Potential (precautionary 
use) or actual short-term 
balance of payments 
need at the time of 
approval; actual need 
required for each 
disbursement
Urgent balance of 
payments need when 
upper- credit-tranche 
(UC1) program is either 
not feasible or not 
needed
Poverty Reduction and 
Growth Strategy
IMF-supported program should be aligned with country-owned poverty-
reduction and growth objectives and should aim to support policies that 
safeguard social and other priority spending
Submission of Poverty 
Reduction Strategy (PRS) 
document by second 
review
Submission of PRS 
document not required; 
If financing need persists, 
SCF user would request 
an ECF with associated 
PRS documentation 
requirements
Submission of PRS 
document not required; 
move to ECF facilitated 
in cases of repeated 
use by preparation of 
a Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (PRSP)
Conditionality
UCT; flexibility on 
adjustment path and 
timing
UCT; aim to resolve 
balance of payments 
need in the short term
No UCT and no 
conditionality based on 
ex post review; track 
record used to qualify for 
repeat use (except under 
shocks window)
Access policies
Annual limit of 100% of quota; cumulative limit (net of scheduled repayments) of 
300% of quota. Exceptional access: annual limit of 150% of quota; cumulative limit 
(net of scheduled repayments) of 450% of quota
Norms: access declines 
with total outstanding 
credit; 120% of quota if 
outstanding credit is less 
than 100% of quota; 75%
Sublimits (given lack 
of UCT conditionality): 
annual 25% of quota, 
100% of quota 
cumulative (net of
559
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
Table 16.5  IMF concessional lending facilities to low-income countries
Extended Credit Facility 
(ECF)
Standby Credit Facility 
(SCF)
Rapid Credit Facility 
(RCF)
Objective
of quota if outstanding 
credit is greater than 
or equal to 100% of 
quota; SCFs treated as 
precautionary annual 
access limit 75% of quota, 
average annual access 
limit 50% of quota
scheduled repayments); 
under the shocks 
window: 50% annual and 
125% cumulative (net of 
scheduled repayments)
Financing terms
Interest rate: Zero 
Repayment terms: 
5½–10 years
Interest rate: 0.25% 
Repayment terms: 4-8 
years Availability fee: 
0.15% on available but 
undrawn amounts 
under precautionary 
arrangement
Interest rate: Zero 
Repayment terms: 
5½–10 years
Source: IMF, 2014.
Other IMF activities
As well as providing finance and loans to member countries, the IMF has a number of other 
responsibilities connected with the smooth functioning of the world economy, including the sur-
veillance of exchange rates and promoting the health of the world financial system. One of the 
mandates of the IMF is to monitor the exchange rate policies of countries. Article IV, Section 
I of the original (1947) IMF Charter states that member countries should ‘avoid manipulating 
exchange rates … to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair 
advantage over other members’. By manipulating the exchange rate, the IMF means countries 
indulging in practices that keep an exchange rate undervalued in order to maintain large bal-
ance of payments surpluses. The assessment of exchange rate levels, however, is not easy because 
an ‘equilibrium’ rate depends on how the internal balance of a country is defined, and what is 
regarded as the optimal level of international reserves. There are different ‘equilibrium’ exchange 
rates for different levels of employment and unemployment, different growth rates, and reserves 
to import ratios. But, the IMF lacks any power to inﬂuence the exchange rate policy of countries, 
except persuasion. The sanction of fining countries in persistent surpluses, which Keynes pro-
posed at Bretton Woods, was never adopted.
Criticisms of the IMF
The policy prescriptions of the IMF in developing countries have been, and still are, based on a 
blend of finance and adjustment. Few would dispute the need for international institutions to 
provide finance to ease the burden of balance of payments adjustment. In its adjustment pol­
icies, however, the IMF has come in for severe criticism; so much so that it has been described as 
anti-developmental. In its approach to adjustment, the IMF is conditioned by the beliefs and 
philosophy of the organization itself and the prevailing orthodoxy of neoclassical economic 
theory. The IMF denies that it has a rigid doctrinaire approach to economic policy, but it 
– continued
560
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
clearly has a particular philosophy based on the Washington Consensus. It is a major bastion 
of support of an international economic system that prefers capitalism to socialism, favours 
private investment over public investment, extols the virtues of free trade and the operation of 
the price mechanism, and encourages the free ﬂow of private capital to and from developing 
countries. Gore (2000) argues that this consensus that emerged within the IMF (and World 
Bank) was more than just a paradigm shift from the idea of state-led development to market-
oriented policies. There was a deeper shift in the way development problems were perceived in 
an increasingly globalized world, and the IMF’s policies have been a response to these changes 
in the world economy. The fact remains, however, that a particular orthodoxy has been applied 
to the vast majority of developing countries as if they were one homogeneous mass and can be 
properly treated in exactly the same way.
Joseph Stiglitz (2002), formerly a chief economist of the World Bank, has severely criticized the 
IMF for serving the needs of global finance, rather than the needs of global stability, by encour­
aging premature internal and external financial liberalization. He has satirized the methods 
of the IMF by describing what he calls a four-step programme for every country, regardless 
of circumstances and already ‘pre-drafted’ by IMF officials before they reach the country, for 
‘voluntary’ signature by the country concerned. No signature, no help. The four core elements of 
each programme are privatization of state industries, capital market liberalization, market-based 
pricing, and free trade.
Capital market liberalization has been disastrous for many countries not ready and able to 
cope with volatile capital inﬂows and outﬂows. The IMF has, in fact, admitted that opening 
economies prematurely to free ﬂows of capital constituted ‘an accident waiting to happen’, and 
now concedes that capital controls are justified in some circumstances. The IMF was undoubtedly 
shaken by the 1997 East Asian crisis, which it did not foresee even though there was a massive 
build-up of current account deficits and capital had started to ﬂow out of Southeast Asia long 
before the crisis hit.
Market-based pricing has also been disastrous in many instances, leading to civil unrest. When 
food and fuel subsidies for the poor were lifted in Indonesia in 1998, the country exploded into riots.
Free trade, we saw in Chapter 15, is not optimal from a development point of view. If imports 
grow faster than exports, the balance of payments worsens.
The neoliberal, neoclassical approach to economic thinking and policy-making colours, to a 
large extent, the IMF’s diagnosis of balance of payments problems and their appropriate solu-
tion. Deficits are invariably seen as related to, or caused by, price uncompetitiveness and excess 
monetary demand, to be ‘cured’ by devaluation and demand contraction. But, the IMF still lacks 
a comprehensive theoretical apparatus to deal with two basic questions regarding devaluation: 
How is the degree of overvaluation of a currency determined? How is the optimal pace of adjust-
ment from the overvalued to the equilibrium rate of exchange decided? In keeping with the IMF’s 
philosophy, devaluation and retrenchment are coupled with other measures that, from a balance 
of payments point of view, work in the opposite direction – namely the relaxation of foreign 
exchange controls, the removal of import restrictions, and the dismantling of subsidies and price 
controls.
Critics of the IMF argue with some justification that there is one law for the poor and another 
for the rich. While poor countries must remove controls over foreign exchange and imports as a 
condition of assistance, rich countries continue to impose restrictions on imports from developing 
countries. To support the liberalization programme, the country then has to depress aggregate 
demand sufficiently to accommodate devaluation in the attempt to achieve balance of payments 
561
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
equilibrium, which leads to slow growth and unemployment. The symptoms of balance of payments 
disequilibrium are tackled, but not the root causes of the perpetual tendency towards disequilibrium. 
As we argued in Chapter 15, the balance of payments problems of most developing countries must 
be regarded as primarily structural in nature, relating to the characteristics of the goods produced 
and traded. This implies a very different approach to balance of payments adjustment than one of 
continual devaluation, demand contraction and dismantling of the public sector. At the very least, it 
calls for policies – using a judicious mix of subsidies and controls – to alter the structure of production.
Another criticism of the IMF is that it ignores ‘structural’ surpluses on the balance of payments – 
 
the counterpart of ‘structural’ deficits – and critics argue that the burden of adjustment ought 
to be shared more equitably between deficit and surplus countries, instead of the major part of 
the burden being shouldered by debtor developing countries, as at present. If surplus countries 
do not attempt to adjust by expanding their own economies, or by appreciating their curren-
cies, they should be penalized, and deficit countries ought to be allowed to discriminate against 
the goods of these countries. This would be a revival of the idea of ‘scarce currencies’, and of the 
right of countries to control imports from ‘scarce currency’ countries, that is, from those with 
surpluses.
Critics would also argue that if the IMF is genuinely concerned with development as well as 
providing balance of payments support, it could distribute all new issues of SDRs to developing 
countries to spend in developed countries. After all, if the developed countries were not able to 
earn their reserves by selling goods to developing countries in exchange for SDRs, they would have 
to earn them in some other way. We shall return to this matter below.
The IMF has become sensitive to some of these criticisms in recent years, particularly to the 
charge that it is ‘anti-developmental’. Along with the World Bank, the IMF now declares itself 
committed to poverty reduction and allowing countries to ‘own’ their own policies through 
the formulation of Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers. Instead of countries having to fulfil a 
mass of individual conditions for loan support, governments can now specify just a few broad 
outcomes relating to poverty reduction, health and education. To what extent it will change its 
attitude to balance of payments difficulties and the need for devaluation and deﬂation, how-
ever, is still an open question.
The IMF also now has an Independent Evaluation Office (IEO), established in 2001, to moni-
tor its lending activities and research the effects of its lending policies. The IEO chose three sub-
jects for its first studies:
•
• fiscal adjustment in IMF-supported programmes
•
• the role of the IMF in three capital account crises (Indonesia and Korea, 1997–98 and Brazil, 
1998–99)
•
• prolonged use of IMF resources.
Kenen (2004) surveys the results of the studies so far. On fiscal policy, the IEO criticizes IMF 
programmes for not paying enough attention to raising income and property taxes, and 
combating tax evasion, and for focusing too heavily on cutting public employment or capping 
wages in periods of fiscal crisis. In general, fiscal policy has not been ‘too tight’, although the fiscal 
outcome has normally been tighter than forecast. In Korea and Indonesia, however, in 1997–98, 
there was too much fiscal stringency because the IMF did not foresee the collapse of investment 
and output, so that IMF policies made the situation worse. The prolonged use of IMF resources 
has increased in recent years because, as Keynes once said: ‘if you owe a bank a little, the bank 
owns you, but if you owe the bank a lot you own the bank’. The IMF has been reluctant to pull out 
562
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
of countries in case it doesn’t get repaid at all. The evaluation reaches some interesting findings, 
which have general lessons:
•
• Excessively detailed conditionality does not appear to be effective.
•
• Conditionality that is focused on policy rules or procedures, rather than on discretionary one-
time actions, seems to be most effective.
The International Financial Institution Advisory Commission, known as the Meltzer 
Commission, appointed by the US Congress, which reported in 2000, recommended that the IMF 
should withdraw from the development field entirely and concentrate on the role of ‘lender of last 
resort’ to emerging economies facing financial crisis. This would be a return to its original function 
of lending to countries in short-term balance of payments difficulties. Likewise, the World Bank 
should pare down its activities, lending only to really poor countries, and not to countries able 
to attract private capital. In line with the focus on poverty reduction, lending should be confined 
to countries with an income of less than $4,000 per head with low credit ratings. For the poorest 
countries, there should be grants not loans. Lending to Asia and Latin America could largely be 
left to the regional development banks in those regions. In general, there should be a much clearer 
distinction between the activities of the IMF and the World Bank. This would be a return to the 
original conception at Bretton Woods that the World Bank would act as the development agency 
and the IMF would be like a bank to be used in emergencies only, but not get involved in detailed 
policy-making itself in the countries concerned. A move in this direction would disarm many of 
the IMF’s critics.
The results of IMF programmes
The effects of the IMF’s programmes on countries’ economic performance have been very mixed. 
In an early study, Reichmann and Stillson (1978) examined the effects of IMF programmes in 
developed and developing countries in the period 1963–72, comparing the two years after the 
implementation of the programme with the two years before. Taking the balance of payments as 
a whole (current plus capital account), of the 75 cases examined, only 18 showed a statistically sig-
nificant improvement and 4 showed an actual worsening. In the 29 cases where the inﬂation rate 
had exceeded 5% before the programme, it had worsened in 6 cases and in 16 cases there was no 
significant change. As far as GDP growth is concerned, of the 70 cases examined, the performance 
had improved in 33 but deteriorated in 28. A study by Donavan (1982) of the non-oil-developing 
countries for the period 1971–80 revealed a similar pattern: some improvement in the balance of 
payments, mixed effects on growth and some tendency towards inﬂation.
Following a major analysis of over 30 IMF stabilization programmes supported by upper-
tranche credits between 1964 and 1979, Killick (1984a, 1984b) advocated what he called a ‘real 
economy approach to balance of payments’ or ‘adjustment with growth’, which would be a more 
ﬂexible supply-oriented approach with demand management subservient.
One of the purposes of the Extended Fund Facility and the (now defunct) Structural 
Adjustment Facility was to permit the IMF to deal with structural disequilibrium, but as far as the 
EFF is concerned, the programmes were no different from conventional demand management 
programmes built around monetary and fiscal contraction coupled with trade liberalization and 
some production incentives.
In a follow-up study of IMF programmes in developing countries, Killick (1995) criticized 
the IMF’s overreliance on conditionality and performance criteria, which invariably leads to the 
563
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
breakdown of IMF programmes. To avoid breakdowns and pressure on IMF resources, he calls 
for the relaxation of standardized reform packages and a greater emphasis on locally initiated 
programmes of stabilization and reform. Above all, the programmes should set a growth target of 
at least 1% above population growth, and sufficient financing for this should be mobilized. Killick 
finds that the main victim of IMF programmes is investment, and that there is no evidence that 
IMF financing acts as a catalyst for private investment.
Taylor (1988) reports the results of studies of 18 countries, conducted under the auspices of 
the World Institute for Development Economics Research (WIDER) in Helsinki. The principal find-
ing of the authors of the country studies is that ‘past policies could have been designed to bet-
ter effect, and that programmes of the Fund/Bank type are optimal for neither stabilization nor 
growth and income redistribution in the Third World’. This is a serious indictment of policy from 
some of the world’s leading development economists. There are alternative programmes to those 
implemented by the IMF, but they would be more interventionist and more directly concerned 
with the targets than with the precise instruments. There is a role for selective import controls, 
export subsidies, multiple exchange rates, low interest rates and so on, but these are all frowned 
on by the IMF. The IMF conducts its own in-house studies of programmes and is naturally more 
sanguine, but is conscious that the design of programmes can be improved. In a study of 45 IMF 
lending arrangements approved between mid-1988 and mid-1991, Schadler (1996) reports strik-
ing gains on the external accounts, but virtually no improvement in inﬂation, investment and 
growth. Four explanations are given:
•
• Countries coming to the IMF too late
•
• Too much emphasis on the external objective of balance of payments equilibrium rather than 
domestic objectives
•
• The breaking of monetary targets
•
• Not enough emphasis on raising domestic saving.
Research on the effect of IMF programmes on the growth of per capita income by Przeworksi 
and Vreeland (2000) and Dreher (2006) shows a negative effect. Dreher’s (2006) study examines 
data for 98 countries over the period 1970–2000 and, overall, finds a negative effect of 1.7 percent-
age points per annum (on average), although the compliance with conditionality mitigated the 
negative effect. Dreher’s conjecture is that ‘the short-term effect of demand compression takes 
place very quickly, while the compliance measures pick up later adherence to the more structural 
aspects of policy conditions’.
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) and developing countries
One possibility for increasing the ﬂow of resources to developing countries is to distribute to 
them most, if not all, of the saving accruing to developed countries from the issue of costless 
SDRs as a means of international payment. The IMF established SDRs in July 1969. To date, 
there have been only four allocations of SDRs: 9.3 billion between 1970 and 1972; 12.1 billion 
between 1979 and 1981; 161.2 billion in 2009, and a one-off injection of 21.5 billion in the wake 
of the financial crisis and world economic recession in 2008–09, allocated mainly to low-income 
countries.
The normal basis of allocation of SDRs between countries is the member countries’ quota 
subscriptions to the IMF. This means that approximately 70% of the new international money 
created has been distributed to the world’s richest countries, while the poorest countries have 
564
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
received only 30%. If the SDRs had been distributed on a per capita basis, the distribution would 
have been almost exactly the reverse.
There can be no doubt about the potential benefits of international money, such as SDRs, for 
the world as a whole, but there are several objections to the present distribution, and reasons 
to believe that a redistribution of SDRs in favour of developing countries could increase world 
welfare. First, the balance of payments adjustment costs of developing countries are generally 
higher than those of developed countries, and this in itself constitutes an economic argument for 
revising the present allocation rules. But second, SDRs represent a social saving because they are 
costless to produce (unlike gold), and do not have to be earned by exporting (unlike dollars). The 
view that the social saving to SDRs should be distributed to the developing countries has spawned 
several proposals for a so-called link between development assistance and SDRs, which would 
have several advantages:
1.	 If there was a regular expansion of SDRs a link would provide a useful mechanism by which 
 
total development aid could be guaranteed to rise with the long-term growth of world trade 
and production. At present, there is no guarantee that aid will rise in proportion to world 
income. Aid programmes are chopped and changed according to the balance of payments 
situation of donor countries.
2.	 A link scheme would increase the proportion of total international aid that is untied, and this 
would not impose any reserve losses on the donor, as when a country unties its aid unilater-
ally. All donor countries would gain reserves in exchange for the exports they provide to the 
developing countries.
3.	 If the link scheme operated through such international financial institutions as the World Bank 
or one of its affiliates, these multilateral institutions would be provided with a regular ﬂow of 
resources without the necessity of entering into time-consuming negotiations with national 
governments.
The historical origin of the link idea can be traced back to Keynes’ plan, proposed at Bretton 
Woods in 1944, for an International Clearing Union (ICU) with the power to issue international 
money for collectively agreed purposes. The function of the ICU was not only to be a world 
central bank but also to lend to international organizations pursuing internationally agreed 
object­
ives, in particular, at that time, for postwar relief work and the management of international 
commodities.
The variety of link proposals that have been put forward can be classified into three types: a 
direct link, an organic link and an inorganic (or indirect, voluntary) link.
As far as a direct link is concerned, the simplest method would be to allocate more SDRs 
directly to developing countries, as was done in 2009. Alternatively, the IMF quotas to developing 
countries could be increased.
An organic link refers to the possibility of channelling SDRs to developing countries via 
developed countries, development agencies, or both. The direct allocation of SDRs to development 
agencies probably has the most advantages and the least drawbacks among the organic link 
proposals. Development agencies would have accounts with the IMF to which SDRs would be 
credited. The development agencies would then lend in the normal way. When goods were 
purchased from exporters by developing countries, the IMF would then transfer the SDRs from 
the account of the development agencies to the account of the exporting country. The country 
would then pay its exporters in its domestic currency. The scheme has the advantage of being 
simple and could be introduced with minimal amendments to the IMF Articles of Agreement.
565
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
A tied version of the organic link was Scitovsky’s (1966) original plan for a new international 
currency to be issued to deficit countries with unemployed resources, which would relinquish 
domestic currency in exchange. This could then be lent to developing countries, but could only 
be spent in the issuing country. This would serve several purposes. It would provide developing 
countries with unrequited imports at no opportunity cost to developed countries and remedy 
developed countries’ deficits at the same time. This is also a way of eliminating deﬂationary bias 
in the world economy.
An inorganic link would involve developed countries agreeing to make voluntary contri-
butions to the multilateral aid-giving agencies whenever new SDRs were allocated. The con-
tributions would be in national currencies but would represent a uniform proportion of each 
contributor’s SDR allocation. The drawback of the proposal is its voluntary nature – one or two 
major countries might not contribute or might make their contribution dependent on their 
balance of payments. This would introduce a great deal of uncertainty into the scheme. Also, 
national governments would have to agree appropriations and this would create the same dif-
ficulties as regular foreign aid appropriations. There do not seem to be many advantages in an 
inorganic link.
Several objections have been raised against the link proposals but none is very convincing. 
Some have argued against the link on the grounds that the creation of reserves should be kept 
separate from the transfer of real resources. But this has never been the case historically. Resource 
transfers have always been involved in the acquisition of gold and dollars. Since SDRs save real 
resources, it is entirely appropriate that, in the process of reserve creation, the saving should be 
distributed to developing countries.
A second objection to the link is that it would mean the loss of control over the granting and 
distribution of assistance by national governments. Under the link scheme, the distribution of 
the burden of assistance would depend on where the SDRs were spent, which, it is argued, could 
not be accurately forecast. This is a weak argument for two reasons. The same objection may 
be levelled against all forms of untied bilateral aid. There is never an automatic correspondence 
between the financial burden of aid and the real resource burden of aid. It all depends on whether 
the national governments that grant aid allow the resources to be transferred, which depends 
primarily on their policy towards the balance of payments.
A further objection is that the link is likely to be inﬂationary. It is true that developing 
countries will tend to spend new international money rather than add to their reserves, but 
whether or not the resulting claims on developed countries are inﬂationary will depend on 
whether developed countries are willing to release resources to the extent of the claims on them. 
In practice, SDRs could be less inﬂationary than the dollar standard by instituting multilateral 
control over international liquidity rather than unilateral control by the USA, which, because 
of the need for dollars, has not been subject to the anti-inﬂationary discipline that is normally 
present in other countries.
A final objection is that development assistance is not likely to increase under the link because 
governments will cut down on their normal budgetary aid appropriations. Critics argue that it is 
highly unlikely that developed countries would be willing to give extra aid through the link but 
not in other forms. This objection can also be challenged. First, the reserve effects of the two 
forms of assistance are not the same. Conventional aid worsens the donor’s balance of payments, 
whereas the link scheme would improve the balance of payments of countries where SDRs were 
spent and thus improve the reserve position. Second, governments often wish to provide aid for 
specific purposes and this desire would not be undermined by a link. Moreover, since it is difficult 
566
I N T E R N AT I O N A L  T R A D E ,  T H E  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  D E V E L O P M E N T
for a country to know how much aid it is providing through the link, it would be difficult for a 
country to offset it. The link deserves much more consideration in international monetary circles 
than it has received to date. To paraphrase Pirandello, if ever there were an instrument in search 
of a policy, it is SDRs.
Summary
•
• A major constraint on the growth of output in many developing countries is a deficit on the 
current account of the balance of payments, or, in other words, a shortage of foreign exchange 
to pay for imports.
•
• The International Monetary Fund (IMF) was established at the Bretton Woods conference in 
1944 to give financial support to countries in temporary balance of payments difficulties, but 
the deficits of developing countries are structural and long term, relating to the nature of the 
goods they export and import.
•
• A country’s growth rate consistent with balance of payments equilibrium on current account 
depends on changes in the real exchange rate, the price elasticities of demand for exports and 
 
imports, the growth of world income, and the income elasticity of demand for exports and imports.
•
• If the real exchange rate is constant over time, the long-run growth of GDP can be approxi-
mated by the ratio of the growth of export volume and the income elasticity of demand for 
imports.
•
• Capital inﬂows can lift a balance of payments constraint on growth, but only by a small amount 
for realistic values of the sustainable ratio of deficits (or international debt) to GDP.
•
• Currency depreciation needs to be continuous to raise a country’s growth rate permanently 
consistent with balance of payments equilibrium, but currency depreciation can be very 
inﬂationary.
•
• No single exchange rate regime can be prescribed for all developing countries. Each country 
needs to choose its own regime consistent with other economic objectives.
•
• The IMF has many lending facilities, but access is mainly related to the size of a country’s quota 
with the IMF, not to the scale of difficulties confronting the country.
•
• IMF conditionality has been severely criticized as deﬂationary, and insensitive to the circum-
stances and needs of countries. The results of IMF policies have been disappointing.
•
• Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) could be distributed to developing countries as a means of 
 
financial support, to be spent in developed countries. This would increase developed countries’ 
reserves and transfer resources to developing countries.
1.	 What factors determine the demand for a country’s exports and imports?
2.	 Can the devaluation of a country’s currency guarantee balance of payments equi-
librium on the current account?
3.	 What factors determine the income elasticity of demand for a country’s exports?
4.	 Why are developing countries more prone to balance of payments disequilibrium 
than developed countries?
Discussion questions
Chapter 16
567
1 6  •  B A L A N C E  O F  PAY M E N T S  A N D  I N T E R N AT I O N A L  M O N E TA R Y  A S S I S TA N C E
Websites on balance of payments and IMF
International Monetary Fund www.imf.org
UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics http://unctad.org/en/Pages/Publications/Handbook-of-Statistics.
aspx
UN Comtrade comtrade.un.org
5.	 What do you understand by the IMF’s ‘supply-side approach to devaluation’ in 
developing countries?
6.	 What factors need to be taken into account in choosing a country’s exchange rate 
regime?
7.	 What are the lessons of the financial crisis in Southeast Asia in 1997?
8.	 How do the ordinary and special facilities of the IMF work? What do you under-
stand by ‘conditionality’?
9.	 What criticisms have been levelled against the IMF in its policies of support to 
developing countries?
10.	 What have been the effects of IMF policies in developing countries?
11.	 How could SDRs be used simultaneously as an instrument of aid to developing 
countries and as a means of employment creation in developed countries?
Discussion questions – continued
Chapter 16
