283
•
• Introduction
•
• Dualism
•
• The process of cumulative causation
•
• Regional inequalities
•
• International inequality and centre–periphery models
•
• Two models of ‘regional’ growth rate differences: Prebisch and Kaldor
•
• The new economic geography
•
• Theories of dependence and unequal exchange
•
• Unequal exchange
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Notes
DUALISM, CENTRE–PERIPHERY 
MODELS AND THE PROCESS 
OF CUMULATIVE CAUSATION
10
284
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Introduction
It is easy to argue that poverty and backwardness are due to a general shortage and inefficient 
use of the key factors of production; it is much harder to determine precisely why there should 
be a dearth of some factors and an abundance of others, and why development may be a slow 
and lengthy process. It is certainly impossible to explain current international discrepancies in 
the level of development with reference to initial differences in factor endowments. The present 
development gap in the world economy has arisen largely through industrial development in 
certain selected areas of the world, which, in turn, has generated its own factor endowments. The 
purpose here, however, is not to consider why some countries were able to industrialize sooner 
than others, but rather to consider some of the mechanisms through which divisions in the world 
economy, and unequal advantage between developed and developing countries, are perpetuated.
First, the dualistic structure of developing countries will be considered. Then we shall exam-
ine Gunnar Myrdal’s model of the process of circular and cumulative causation, which can be 
applied to regions and countries alike (Myrdal, [1957] 1963). We shall see that Myrdal’s model 
is one of many that can be used to understand the perpetuation of the development gap and 
divergences between North and South or between the ‘centre’ (industrialized) countries and the 
‘periphery’ (primary producing) countries.
The pioneering models of Raúl Prebisch and Nicholas Kaldor will be examined in this context, 
and their similarities emphasized. We will then discuss the new economic geography, which has 
links with the model of cumulative causation, and the role of geographic factors that seem to be 
associated with divisions in the world economy. Finally, we shall briefly discuss models of unequal 
exchange and dependency, which emphasize alternative institutional and economic mechanisms 
making for international inequality in the world economy.
Dualism
The term ‘dualism’ describes a condition in which developing countries usually find themselves 
in the early stages of development, which can have implications for the future pattern and pace 
of development. There are a number of possible definitions and interpretations of ‘dualism’, but 
the term is used mainly to refer to the economic and social divisions in an economy, such as 
differences in the level of technology between sectors or regions, differences in the degree of 
geographic development, and differences in social customs and attitudes between the rural and 
urban sectors of developing countries.
Dualism in all its aspects is a concomitant of the growth of a money economy, which, as we saw in 
Chapter 5, may either arise naturally as a result of specialization or be imposed from outside. Basically, 
therefore, a dual economy is characterized by a difference in social customs between the subsistence 
and exchange sectors of the economy, by a gap between the levels of technology in the rural subsist-
ence sector and the industrial monetized sector, and often by a gap in the level of per capita income 
between regions of a country if the money economy and industrial development are geographically 
concentrated. In fact, it is not unusual for geographic, social and technological dualism to occur 
together, with each type of dualism tending to reinforce the other. Also, the more ‘progressive’ sec-
tors typically have favourable access to scarce factors of production, which is a major cause of the 
persistence of dualism. Urban bias plays an important part in this process (Lipton, 1977).
The first question to ask is: What development problems does the existence of dualism pose 
for an economy, and how can dualism impede and retard development? As far as social dualism 
285
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
is concerned, the obstacles are similar to those presented by a traditional society with no mod-
ern exchange sector at all. The task is one of providing incentives in the subsistence sector and 
drawing the subsistence sector into the money economy. The fact that the indigenous subsist-
ence sector may be reluctant to alter its traditional way of life and respond to incentives is not 
peculiar to a dual economy. It is therefore true that underdevelopment tends to be associated 
with social dualism, but it would be misleading to regard social dualism as an underlying cause 
of backwardness and poverty. It is difficult to argue that development would be more rapid in 
the absence of a monetary sector, from which the existence of dualism stems. Even if the growth 
of the exchange sector makes little impact on attitudes in the indigenous sector, it is difficult to 
envisage any progress without the growth of the money economy. In short, it seems more realistic 
to regard social dualism as an inevitable consequence of development rather than as a basic cause 
of underdevelopment itself.
Similar reservations can be raised over whether it is accurate to describe technological dual-
ism as a cause of underdevelopment. As with social dualism, it is probably more realistic to regard 
it as an inevitable feature of the development process. Two disadvantages are commonly associ-
ated with technological dualism. The first is that where technological dualism is the result of a for-
eign enclave, a proportion of the profits generated in the industrial sector will be remitted to the 
home country, reducing the level of saving and investment below what it might have been. The 
second disadvantage is more fundamental, but difficult to avoid. If in the rural, or non-monetized, 
sector of the economy, production processes are characterized by labour-intensive techniques 
and variable technical coefficients of production, while production processes in the industrial, 
technologically advanced sector are capital-intensive and possess relatively fixed technical coef-
ficients, it is possible that the technology of the industrial sector may impede the progress of the 
rural agricultural sector. First, relatively fixed technical coefficients (that is, a low elasticity of sub-
stitution between factors) means that labour can be absorbed from agriculture into industry only 
as fast as the growth of capital, and second, capital intensity itself will restrict employment oppor-
tunities in the industrial sector, contributing to urban unemployment and perpetuating under-
development in the rural sector. Hence, productivity growth in the agricultural sector, which is 
recognized as being necessary to establish a secure basis for take-off into sustained growth, may 
be slowed down.
It is true that if the technology of the modern sector (imported or otherwise) does embody 
fixed technological coefficients, it may be difficult for an economy to use the socially optimum 
combination of factors, but this disadvantage must be weighed against the favourable impact on 
productivity stemming from the more advanced technology. If capital accumulation and technical 
progress, and the development of an industrial sector – in addition to agricultural development – 
are essential for raising the level of per capita income, it is difficult to see how technological dual-
ism can be avoided, at least in the early stages of development. The best that can be done is, first, 
to encourage the widespread application and rapid assimilation of technical progress throughout 
all sectors of the economy, and, second, to ensure the ‘proper’ pricing of factors of production to 
prevent the introduction of a technology that may be profitable to private individuals but does 
not maximize the returns to society at large because factor prices do not adequately reflect rela-
tive factor endowments. But even a technology that is socially optimal in this sense may not be 
the technology that provides the soundest basis for sustained growth in the long run. The ques-
tion of the choice of techniques was discussed in detail in Chapter 6, and the issue of the ‘social’ 
pricing of factors of production can be found on this book’s website (www.palgravehighered.
com/Thirlwall-Econ-Of-Dev-10e).
286
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The process of cumulative causation
The hypothesis of cumulative causation as an explanation of the backwardness of developing 
nations is associated with Gunnar Myrdal ([1957] 1963), the well-known Swedish economist who 
won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1974. Basically, it is a hypothesis of geographic dualism, 
applicable to nations and regions within nations, which can be advanced to account for the per-
sistence of spatial differences in a wide variety of development indices, including wage rates, per 
capita income, employment growth rates and levels of unemployment. As such, the process of 
cumulative causation is a direct challenge to static equilibrium theory, which predicts that the 
working of economic and social forces will cause spatial differences to narrow.
Myrdal ([1957] 1963) contends that, in the context of development, economic and social 
forces produce tendencies towards disequilibrium, and that the assumption in economic the-
ory that disequilibrium situations tend towards equilibrium is false. If this were not so, how 
can we explain the tendency for international and regional differences in living standards 
to widen? Thus, Myrdal replaces the assumption of stable equilibrium with what he calls 
the hypothesis of circular and cumulative causation, arguing that the use of this hypothesis 
can go a long way towards explaining why international differences in levels of development, 
and interregional differences in development within nations, may persist and even widen 
over time.
Myrdal ([1957] 1963) first considers the hypothesis in the context of a geographically dual 
economy, describing how, through the mechanisms of labour migration, capital movements 
and trade, the existence of dualism not only retards the development of backward regions but 
can also slow up the development of the whole economy. To describe the process of circular 
and cumulative causation, let us start off with a country in which all regions have attained the 
same stage of development, as measured by the same level of per capita income, or by similar 
levels of productivity and wages in the same occupations. Then assume that an exogenous 
shock produces a disequilibrium situation, with development proceeding more rapidly in one 
region than another. The proposition is that economic and social forces will tend to strengthen 
the disequilibrium situation by leading to cumulative expansion in the favoured region at the 
expense of other regions, which then become comparatively worse off, retarding their future 
development.
Gunnar Myrdal
Born 1898, Skattungbyn, Sweden. Died 1987. Politician, economist 
and prolific writer in several fields of economics. One of the architects 
of the Swedish welfare state in the 1930s. His early work in macroeco-
nomics anticipated Keynes’ General Theory. In development econom-
ics, best known for his challenge to equilibrium theory, and the notion 
of ‘circular and cumulative causation’, in books such as An American 
Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy (1944) and 
Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions (1957). Also wrote a 
massive three-volume tome, Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty 
of Nations (1968). Awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics, 1974.
287
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
This contrasts with neoclassical equilibrium theory, which assumes that, through the process 
of factor mobility, wage rates and the rate of profit will equalize across regions. According to neo-
classical theory, in places where labour is scarce and capital is abundant, labour will flow in and 
capital will flow out, thus reducing wages and raising the rate of profit, while in less prosperous 
areas where labour is abundant, labour will flow out and capital will flow in, raising wages and 
reducing the rate of profit.
In contrast, what Myrdal ([1957] 1963) has in mind is a type of multiplier–accelerator mech­
anism producing increasing returns in the favoured region. Instead of leading to equality, the 
forces of supply and demand interact with each other to produce cumulative movements away 
from spatial equilibrium. Since the wage level is the basic determinant of per capita income, let us 
take the example of wages and wage differences to illustrate the kind of process that Myrdal has 
in mind. Take two regions, A and B (for example, northern and southern Italy), and assume that 
wages are determined by supply and demand, as in Figures 10.1 and 10.2.
Suppose to start with that wage levels are identical in the two regions, that is, WA 5 WB. Then 
assume that a stimulus of some sort causes the demand for labour, and therefore wages, to rise 
in region A relative to region B; that is, the demand curve for labour in region A shifts to D1D1, 
causing wages to rise to WA1. Since labour tends to respond to differences in economic opportun­
ities of this sort, the wage discrepancy may be assumed to induce labour migration from region 
B to region A. Equilibrium theory then predicts that there will be a tendency for wage levels to 
be equalized once more through a reduction in labour supply in region B from SS to S1S1 and an 
WA1
D1
D
D2
D2
S
S1
D1
D
S1
S
WA2
WA
Wages
0
Supply of and
demand for
labour
Figure 10.1  Region A
Figure 10.2  Region B
WB1
D1
D
S
S1
D1
D
S1
S
WB
Wages
0
Supply of and
demand for
labour
288
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
increase in labour supply in region A from SS to S1S1, giving a wage in region A of WA2, equal to a 
wage in B of WB1.
According to the hypothesis of cumulative causation, however, changes in supply may be 
expected to react on demand in such a way as to counteract the tendency towards equilibrium. 
Migration from region B denudes the area of human capital and entrepreneurs, and depresses 
the local demand for goods and services and factors of production, while movements into region 
A, on the other hand, will tend to stimulate enterprise and the demand for products, adding to 
the demand for factors of production. In short, migration from region B will cause the demand 
curve for labour to shift to the left, say to D1D1, and migration into region A will cause the demand 
curve for labour to shift further to the right, say to D2D2, causing the initial wage discrepancy at 
least to persist, if not widen (if the shifts in demand are greater than those assumed). Thus, once 
development differences appear, a chain of cumulative expansion in the favoured region is set in 
motion, and this has what Myrdal ([1957] 1963) calls a backwash effect on other regions, causing 
development differences in general to persist or even diverge.
Capital movements and trade also play a part in the process of cumulative causation. In a 
free market, capital, like labour, will tend to move to where the prospective return is highest, and 
this will be to the region where demand is buoyant (not necessarily the region where the wage 
is lowest, as in neoclassical theory). Capital, labour and entrepreneurship will tend to migrate 
together. The benefits of trade will also accrue to the host region. Regions within a nation using 
a common currency cannot have balance of payments difficulties in the normal sense, but the 
maintenance of employment depends on the ability to export, otherwise unemployment will 
appear. If production is subject to increasing returns, the region experiencing the rapid growth of 
factor supplies will be able to increase its competitive advantage over the relatively lagging regions 
containing smaller scale industries, and increase its real income accordingly. In this same way, the 
general freeing and widening of international markets and the expansion of world trade will tend 
to favour the more rapidly growing regions within nation-states.
The impact of immigration into the expanding region is also likely to induce improvements 
in transport and communications and education and health facilities, improving efficiency and 
productivity and widening still further the competitive advantage of the growing region over the 
lagging regions experiencing emigration of the factors of production.
Such is the potential strength of the backwash effects of the process of circular and cumulative 
causation that Albert Hirschman (1958), eminent development economist, once suggested that lag-
ging regions may possibly be better off if they became sovereign political states. If a lagging area was 
an independent ‘country’, the mobility of factors of production could be more easily controlled, 
competition between the leading and lagging regions could be reduced, each region could more 
easily concentrate on producing goods in which it possessed a comparative cost advantage, separate 
exchange rates could be fixed for the two regions, and regions could more easily protect themselves.
Despite these potential advantages of nationhood for a backward region, Hirschman (1958) 
argues against sovereignty because he believes that the forces making for the interregional trans-
mission of growth are likely to be more powerful than those making for ‘international’ transmission.
Hirschman (1958) recognizes, however, the continued existence of backwash effects and 
argues that, to offset them, a nation that is concerned with developing its backward regions 
should provide certain equivalents of sovereignty, such as a separate tax system and the right 
to protect certain activities. Policies must be designed to reduce what he calls the polarization 
effects of interregional differences in development and to strengthen the trickle-down effects. 
The ‘trickle-down’ effects are the favourable repercussions on backward regions emanating from 
expanding regions, which Myrdal ([1957] 1963) calls spread effects. These trickle-down or spread 
289
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
effects consist mainly of an increased demand for the backward areas’ products and the diffusion 
of technology and knowledge. In Myrdal’s view, the spread effects are weaker than the backwash 
effects, and if interregional differences are to be narrowed, nations must rely on state interven-
tion through regional policies. The only alternative is to wait for a natural end to the process of 
cumulative causation.
A time must eventually come when increasing costs in the expanding region will halt expan-
sion. The higher costs of living, and the external diseconomies produced by congestion, will ulti-
mately outweigh the benefits of greater efficiency and higher money returns to the factors of 
production. The process of migration will then be halted, and possibly reversed. This stage has 
now been reached in some developed countries. The question for governments with certain 
growth and welfare objectives is whether they can afford to let the process take its natural course, 
and to tolerate the inequalities that may arise before the process ends. High levels of inequality 
can lead to negative social, economic and political consequences that have a destabilizing effect 
on societies, causing insecurity and social unrest. In practice, governments in many advanced 
countries have taken active steps for many years to redress regional imbalances, and this is one 
reason why regional disparities tend to be less in advanced countries than in developing countries. 
In developing countries, however, Myrdal ([1957] 1963) was of the view that, far from lessening 
regional inequalities, the state has been a positive force in their persistence: ‘In many of the poorer 
countries the natural drift towards inequalities has been supported and magnified by built-in feu-
dal and other inegalitarian institutions and power structures which aid the rich in exploiting the 
poor.’ This is still true in many poor countries today.
Regional inequalities
The international cross-section evidence on regional inequalities, and time-series evidence for indi-
vidual countries, suggests that the degree of inequality follows an inverted U-shaped curve; that is, 
regional inequalities first rise with the level of development and then decrease. This pattern is not 
hard to explain. Very poor countries are uniformly poor. Regional differences then first emerge as a 
result of some favourable shock to one region or set of regions – for example an export enclave or 
the establishment of industrial activities. Once a difference has emerged, it will tend to be widened 
by the processes already described. In the early stages of development, migration from poor to richer 
regions will tend to be selective because only those with skills and education will be able to afford 
to migrate. Capital will tend to locate in the more dynamic region(s). Spread effects emanating from 
prosperous regions will be weak, owing to a general lack of political and economic integration.
The factors that accentuate differences in the early stages of development, however, will tend 
to weaken with time as countries get richer:
•
• migration will become less selective
•
• the spread effects will become more powerful
•
• industrialization will tend to spread and the size of the agricultural sector shrink
•
• external diseconomies of expansion and congestion in expanding regions will worsen, curbing 
capital and labour migration from poor to rich regions
•
• governments may also attempt to rectify imbalances through the implementation of regional 
policies.
The empirical evidence shows that regional disparities in output and income per head are much 
more unequal in developing countries than in developed countries.
290
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The experience of developing countries contrasts with what is happening in most developed 
countries, including the USA and the European Union. In the USA, Barro and Sala-í-Martin (1992) 
show that a process of regional per capita income convergence has been going on over the past 
100 years. Taking personal income data, they find an inverse relation across US states between the 
average growth of per capita income over the period 1880–1988 and the initial (1880) level of per 
capita income. Only two subperiods, 1920–30 and 1980–88, show evidence of divergence.
In Europe, the evidence is more mixed. Across the regions of Europe, there is some evidence 
of per capita income convergence in the postwar years up to 1980, but not thereafter. Regional 
unemployment rate differences, however, both within Europe as a whole and within industrial 
countries, have remained very stubborn. Fagerberg and Verspagen (1996) took 70 regions in six 
EU countries and showed income convergence up to 1980, but not since. The authors argued 
that the scope for convergence is not exhausted, but other factors in the 1980s pushed towards 
divergence, particularly differences in unemployment and the R&D effort between industrial and 
agricultural regions.
Indeed, it appears to be the case from a further study by Fagerberg et al. (1996) that regional 
differences in per capita income are systematically related to differences in unemployment rates. 
They took 64 regions in Germany, France, Italy and Spain over the period 1980–90 and found 
India comprises 28 states and 4 union territories. There are huge regional differences 
in living standards measured by per capita income, ranging from 12,000 rupees a year 
in Bihar (the poorest state) to nearly 100,000 rupees per capita in Goa. These are the 
product of history and past growth experience.
Regional differences in living standards can have serious implications for the eco-
nomic and political functioning of national economies. Inflationary pressure in pros-
perous regions can spread to poorer regions reducing real living standards. Political 
resentment can arise and disillusionment with the political process, leading to social 
unrest.
Over the period 1999–2011, regional disparities in India have widened, as measured 
by the standard deviation of per capita incomes, from 0.18 to 0.23 (see Chapter 2 for 
how standard deviation is measured). The growth of these divisions is related mainly to 
the higher share of agriculture in the poorer regions, the faster growth of population, 
and the lower rate of investment in physical and human capital. What is happening in 
India is supportive of Myrdal’s model of circular and cumulative causation, and bodes 
ill for the large percentage of the Indian population that lives in the poorest states 
where life is already wretched.
Source: Cherodian and Thirlwall, 2015.
Case example 10.1
Regional disparities in per capita income in India
Shankar and Shah (2003) look at trends in regional inequality over time in 14 developing coun-
tries and find inequalities increasing – or moving up an inverted U-shaped curve. Rodriguez-Pose 
and Gill (2006) also show this in a study of India, China and Mexico since 1980, and find that the 
growth of regional inequalities is significantly related to the shift of trade from primary to manu-
factured exports. This trade effect is greater, the larger the share of trade in GDP and the greater 
the shift. Regional inequalities continue to rise in India – see Case example 10.1.
291
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
that the growth in poor regions was hampered by unfavourable industrial structure and weak 
R&D effort. There was evidence of convergence, but only after allowing for differences in indus-
trial structure, R&D effort, population density and migration. Interestingly, labour migration was 
found to have a strong positive impact on per capita income growth, indicating that migration 
was disequilibrating during this period. The policy implications are that the predominance of 
agriculture is a barrier to growth in poor regions, mainly because the scope for scale economies 
and R&D is less than in industry. Greater regional balance requires structural change in favour of 
industrial activities, but this, in turn, requires an appropriate physical infrastructure and the provi-
sion of human capital.
International inequality and centre–periphery models
The process of circular and cumulative causation is also used by Myrdal ([1957] 1963) in an 
attempt to explain widening international differences in the level of development from 
similar initial conditions. Through the mechanisms of labour migration, capital movements 
and trade, international inequalities are perpetuated in exactly the same way as regional 
inequalities within nations. Myrdal argues that, through trade, the developing countries have 
been forced into the production of goods, notably primary products, with inelastic demand 
with respect to both price and income. This has put developing countries at a grave dis-
advantage compared with developed countries with respect to balance of payments and 
availability of foreign exchange. Moreover, with the tendency for the efficiency wage (that is, 
the money wage in relation to labour productivity) to fall in faster-growing areas relative to 
other areas, developed countries have gained a cumulative competitive trading advantage, 
especially in manufactured commodities. Myrdal, of course, is not alone in this view, and we 
shall elaborate below on other models that stress the unequal gains and balance of payments 
effects of trade as the main mechanisms through which international differences in develop-
ment are perpetuated, including the contribution of the new economic geography pioneered 
by Krugman (1991).
Williamson argues, in his book Trade and Poverty: Why the Third World Fell Behind (2013), that 
divergence in the world economy between ‘centre’ and ‘periphery’ coincided with globalization in 
the nineteenth century that led to increased specialization of manufacturing industry in Europe 
and the USA, combined with increased specialization in primary products in the rest of the world. 
In the periphery, industrialization was thwarted by the rent-seeking behaviour of landowners, and 
price and income volatility slowed its growth compared to the ‘centre’. Trade benefited the centre 
at the expense of the periphery.
In the case of capital movements, Myrdal ([1957] 1963) argues in the same vein; because the 
risks associated with investment tend to be higher in developing countries, the natural tendency 
will be for developing countries to be net exporters of capital. In practice, because of the large 
volume of capital from international lending organizations, and the favourable tax treatment of 
foreign direct investment, developing countries are generally net importers of long-term capital, 
although the short-term capital account tends to be adverse. The fact remains, however, as Lucas 
(1990) points out, that capital flows mainly to regions already rich. With regard to foreign direct 
investment, the richest countries receive over 80% of flows, while the poorest countries (exclud-
ing China) receive less than 5%.
The potential weakness of Myrdal’s hypothesis at the international level concerns the effects 
of labour migration. The international migration of labour from developing to developed 
292
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
countries can have beneﬁcial as well as harmful eﬀects on backward economies. The greatest 
deleterious eﬀect on backward economies is the obvious one of possible loss of human capital, 
although even here, if the human capital is unemployed, migration may not be a serious loss. 
But it is not only the skilled and educated that may be induced to leave their native lands. 
Unskilled labour may also respond to the existence of better employment opportunities 
elsewhere. If it is argued that developing countries suﬀer from underemployment, and that 
productivity is low owing to surplus labour, the emigration of unskilled labour could be a 
substantial beneﬁt to developing countries. It is possible, for example, that emigration has 
helped to raise per capita income in some countries, such as Mexico, Pakistan and Bangladesh, 
while improving the balance of payments through remittances by emigrants to their home 
countries. Migrant remittances now amount to over $500 billion a year, exceeding the level 
of oﬃcial development assistance to developing countries (see Chapter 15). In this important 
respect, generous immigration policies in developed countries can provide a valuable means of 
development assistance.
Even so, any potential gain from unrestricted labour mobility is unlikely to offset the inter-
national backwash effects arising from trade and international capital movements. Even with 
unrestricted migration, therefore, there would still be a tendency for international differ-
ences in the level of development to widen through trade and the free movement of capital. 
The existence of international spread effects gives no reason for modifying this conclusion. 
*OUFSOBUJPOBMTQSFBEFGGFDUTBSFSFMBUJWFMZXFBLoDFSUBJOMZXFBLFSUIBOUIFTQSFBEFGGFDUT
within nations.
What, then, should be our verdict on the hypothesis of cumulative causation? Given that the 
hypothesis assumes free trade and free mobility of the factors of production, it perhaps con-
tains more force with respect to interregional diﬀerences in development within countries than 
international diﬀerences between countries. On the other hand, it cannot be dismissed lightly 
when discussing the development gap in the world economy. In view of the fact that there has 
been no tendency in the recent past for international per capita income levels to converge (see 
Chapters 2 and 4), the hypothesis is not refuted by the evidence. In particular, the present inter-
national trading and payments position of developing countries does not inspire conﬁdence that 
the total gains from trade between developed and developing countries are distributed equitably 
(see Chapters 15 and 16).
The contribution of the hypothesis of cumulative causation to an understanding of develop-
ment and underdevelopment is its emphasis on economic and social development as a cumula-
tive phenomenon and, more important, its challenge to static equilibrium theory; that is, that 
regions or nations that gain an initial advantage may maintain that advantage to the detriment 
of development elsewhere. At its root is the phenomenon of increasing returns, deﬁned broadly 
as the accumulation of productive advantages of the type discussed in Chapter 6 relating to how 
societies progress technologically.
Two models of ‘regional’ growth rate diﬀerences:  
Prebisch and Kaldor
While the Myrdal model of centre and periphery emphasizes the process of cumulative caus-
ation working through increasing returns and competitiveness in favoured regions, other cen-
USFoQFSJQIFSZNPEFMTTUSFTTUIFCBMBODFPGQBZNFOUTJNQMJDBUJPOTPGUIFQBSUJDVMBSQBUUFSOPG
293
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
The Prebisch model1
Consider a two-country, two-commodity model in which the advanced centre produces and 
exports manufactured goods with an income elasticity of demand2 greater than unity, and the 
backward periphery produces and exports primary commodities with an income elasticity of 
demand less than unity. Let us suppose that the income elasticity of demand for manufactures 
(em) is 1.3, and the income elasticity of demand for primary commodities (ep) is 0.8. Assume to 
start with that the growth rates of income of both centre and periphery are equal to 3%, that is, 
gc 5 gp 5 3.0. What will be the growth of exports (x) and imports (m) in the centre and periphery? 
For the centre, we have:
xc 5 gp 3 em 5 3.0 3 1.3 5 3.9%
mc 5 gc 3 ep 5 3.0 3 0.8 5 2.4%
and for the periphery, we have:
xp 5 gc 3 ep 5 3.0 3 0.8 5 2.4%
mp 5 gp 3 em 5 3.0 3 1.3 5 3.9%
With imports growing faster than exports in the periphery, this is not a sustainable position, 
unless the periphery can finance an ever-growing balance of payments deficit on the current 
account by capital inflows. If it cannot, and balance of payments equilibrium on the current 
account is a requirement, there must be some adjustment to raise the rate of growth of exports 
or reduce the rate of growth of imports. Now suppose we rule out the possibility that relative 
Raúl Prebisch
Born 1901, Tucuan, Argentina. Died 1986. Argentina’s most famous 
economist; mixed economics and politics on the national and inter-
national stage. Architect and first president of the Central Bank 
of Argentina in his early thirties; first director of the Economic 
Commission for Latin America, 1948, and first secretary-general of 
UNCTAD, 1964. ‘Father’ of Latin American structuralist thinking; 
worked tirelessly for a fairer deal for poor countries in the world trad-
ing system. First to document, with Hans Singer, the historical decline 
in terms of trade of primary commodities: the Prebisch–Singer thesis.
production and trade between rich and poor countries, which arise from the fact that industrial 
goods produced and traded by rich countries have a higher income elasticity of demand than 
goods produced and traded by poor countries. One of the earliest models, powerful in its simpli­
city, is that of Raúl Prebisch, well-known Argentinian economist (1901–86).
294
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
prices measured in a common currency (or real exchange rate) can change as an adjustment 
mechanism, the only adjustment mechanism left (barring protection) is a reduction in the 
periphery’s growth rate to reduce the rate of growth of imports in line with the rate of growth 
of exports. From the model, we can solve for the necessary growth rate of the periphery to 
keep trade balanced. On the assumptions outlined, we must have mp 5 xp or gpem 5 xp and 
therefore:
gp 5  XP
em
 5  2.4
1.3  5 1.846
Thus, the growth rate of the periphery is constrained to 1.846%, compared with 3% in the centre. 
In these circumstances, both the relative and the absolute gap in income between periphery and 
centre will widen. Notice, in fact, that since the growth of the periphery’s exports is equal to gc 3 
ep, we can write the above equation as:
gp 5  
gc 3 ep
em
and dividing through by gc, we reach the interesting result that the relative growth rates of the 
periphery and centre will equal the ratio of the income elasticity of demand for the two countries’ 
commodities:
gp
gc
  5   
ep
em
This result will hold as long as current account equilibrium on the balance of payments is a 
requirement, and relative price adjustment in international trade is either ruled out as an adjust-
ment mechanism to rectify balance of payments disequilibrium or does not work. To avoid the 
consequences of this model, Prebisch (1959) argued the case for protection and import substitu-
tion, which, in effect, is a policy to reduce em, which for the periphery is the propensity to import 
manufactured goods. We reserve discussion of the relative merits of protection until Chapter 15 
on trade policy.
Kaldor’s model of regional growth rate differences
It is possible to combine the ideas of Myrdal with the insights of Prebisch in a single model, which 
focuses on the role of export growth in the development process in an open economy and in which 
the Prebisch result emerges as a special case if relative prices are fixed and trade is balanced. Kaldor’s 
model (1970) is applicable to regions and open developing economies alike.3 It takes as its starting 
point the not unreasonable assumption that the output of an open economy is demand-deter-
mined, not supply-constrained, and that it is the long-run growth of autonomous demand that 
governs the long-run rate of growth of output. The main component of autonomous demand in 
an open economy is, in turn, demand coming from outside the region; that is, the demand for the 
region’s exports. The model is a variant of export-base models of development, which stress the 
importance of exports as a leading sector. The hypothesis is that once a region obtains a growth 
advantage, it will tend to sustain it at the expense of other regions because faster growth leads to 
faster productivity growth (the so-called Verdoorn effect, see Chapter 3), which keeps the region 
295
   t  % 6 " - * 4 .   $ & / 5 3 & o 1 & 3 * 1 ) & 3 :  . 0 % & - 4
competitive in the export of goods that gave the region its growth advantage in the ﬁrst place. 
Success breeds success, and failure breeds failure. In this section, attention will be conﬁned to out-
lining the model. An examination of the international evidence of the relation between the growth 
of exports and the growth of output in developing countries will be left until Chapter 15.
Let:
gt 5 g(xt) 
(10.1)
where gt is the rate of growth of output in time t, xt is the rate of growth of exports in time t, g is the 
(constant) elasticity of output with respect to export growth (5 1 if exports are a constant pro-
portion of output) and t is time. Apart from the theoretical considerations underlying the speci-
ﬁcation of equation (10.1), that the rate of growth of the economy as a whole will be governed 
by the rate of growth of autonomous demand, there are a number of practical consider 
ations 
that make export demand for highly specialized regions (or countries) extremely important for 
demand and supply. For most industries in a region, local demand is likely to be trivial compared 
with the optimum production capacity of the industries. The viability of regional enterprise must 
largely depend on the strength of demand from outside the region.
There are also a number of important reasons why export demand may be a more potent 
HSPXUIJOEVDJOHGPSDFUIBOPUIFSFMFNFOUT PG EFNBOE FTQFDJBMMZ JO PQFO CBDLXBSE BSFBT o
regions or countries:
1. Exports allow regional specialization, which may bring dynamic as well as static gains.
2. Exports permit imports, and imports may be important in developing areas that lack the cap-
acity to produce development goods themselves.
3. If the exchange of information and technical knowledge is linked to trade, exporting facilitates 
the ﬂow of technical knowledge, which can improve the area’s supply capacity.
Now let us consider the determinants of export demand and the form of the export demand 
function. It is conventional to specify exports as a multiplicative (or constant elasticity) function 
of relative prices measured in a common currency and foreign income. Thus:
Xt 5 a Pdt
Pft
 b
h
 Zt
P 
(10.2)
 
xt 5 h(pdt − pft) 1 e(zt) 
(10.3)
where the lower-case letters represent the rates of growth of the variables. The rate of growth of 
income outside the region (z) and the rate of change of competitors’ prices (pf) may both be taken as 
exogenous to the region. The rate of growth of domestic (export) prices will be endogenous, however. 
Let us assume that prices are formed on the basis of a constant ‘mark-up’ on unit labour costs, so that:
Pdt 5 a W
R  b
t
(Tt) 
(10.4)
where X is the quantity of exports in time t, Pd is the domestic price in time t, Pf is the foreign price 
measured in domestic currency in time t, Z is foreign income in time t, h is the price elasticity
of demand for exports (< 0) and e is the income elasticity of demand for exports (> 0). Taking 
logarithms of the variables and  
differentiating with respect to time gives:
296
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
where Pd is the domestic price, W is the level of money wages, R is the average product of labour 
and T is 11 percentage mark-up on unit labour costs. From equation (10.4), we can write:
pdt 5 wt − rt 1 tt
(10.5)
where the lower-case letters stand for the rates of change of the variables.
The model becomes ‘circular and cumulative’ by specifying the growth of labour productivity 
(r) as partly a function of the growth output itself (Verdoorn’s law). If the function is linear, we 
may write:
rt 5 rat 1 l gt
(10.6)
where rat is the rate of autonomous productivity growth at time t, and l is the Verdoorn coef-
ficient (. 0). Equation (10.6) provides the link between exports and growth via productivity 
growth and prices. Fast export growth leads to fast output growth, and fast output growth leads 
to fast export growth by making goods more competitive. Combining equations (10.1), (10.3), 
(10.5) and (10.6) to obtain an expression for the equilibrium growth rate gives:
gt 5
g3h(wt 2 rat 1 tt 2 pft) 1 P(zt)4
1 1 ghl
 
(10.7)
Remembering that h , 0, the growth rate is shown to vary positively with ra, z, e, pf, z and g, and 
negatively with w and t. The effect of h is ambiguous since it appears in both the numerator and 
the denominator of the equation. It is clear that it is the assumed dependence of productivity 
growth on the growth of output that gives rise to the possibility that once a region obtains a 
growth advantage, it will keep it. Suppose, for example, that a region obtains an advantage in the 
production of goods with a high income elasticity of demand (e), which causes its growth rate to 
rise above that of another region. Through the so-called ‘Verdoorn effect’, productivity growth 
will be higher, the rate of change of prices lower (other things being the same) and the rate of 
growth of exports (and hence the rate of growth of output) higher and so on. Moreover, the fact 
that the region with the initial advantage will obtain a competitive advantage in the produc-
S
x
g
E
r = f3 (g) 
r
–pd  = f4(r)
x  = f2 (–pd )
g = f1(x)
–pd  
Figure 10.3  Convergent–divergent growth
297
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
tion of goods with a high income elasticity of demand will mean that it will be difficult for other 
regions to establish the same activities. This is the essence of the theory of cumulative causation, 
of divergence between ‘centre’ and ‘periphery’ and between industrial (developed) and agricul-
tural (developing) regions (countries). Figure 10.3 illustrates the model graphically.
The distance of each of the linear functions from the origin reflects factors affecting each vari-
able other than the variable specified in the functional relation. From the initial condition, S, the 
growth rate is shown converging to its equilibrium value E, as determined in equation (10.7).4 
The link that the Verdoorn relation provides between exports and growth via productivity and 
prices, and its sustaining influence, is clearly seen. And the greater the dependence of productivity 
growth on the growth of output (that is, the higher l), the higher the equilibrium growth rate will 
be and the greater the divergence between regional growth rates for given differences between 
regions in the other variables and parameters.
An important implication of the model we have developed is that an autonomous shock 
will not be sufficient to raise a lagging region’s growth rate permanently unless the autono-
mous shock favourably affects the parameters and variables of the model, or is a sustained 
shock. On these grounds, the relevance of policies of devaluation in a national context, or 
wage subsidies in a regional context, for improving a region’s growth rate may be called into 
question. What is likely to be required is structural change, in particular structural change to 
improve the demand characteristics of exports. It is recognition of this point that accounts, 
among other things, for the emphasis placed by developing countries on industrialization 
and the restructuring of world trade to provide their manufactured goods with easier access 
to world markets (see Chapter 15).
Note that it is also a property of the model that if relative prices measured in a common cur-
rency do not change (that is, pdt 2 pft 5 0), then export growth is determined solely by income 
growth outside the region or country, and equation (10.7) would reduce to:
gt 5 ge(zt)
(10.8)
and if balanced trade is a requirement so that the growth of imports (m) is equal to the growth 
of exports (m 5 x), we have:
gtπ 5 e(zt)
(10.9)
where π is the income elasticity of demand for imports.
Thus, with relative prices fixed, the growth elasticity with respect to exports (g) in equation 
(10.1) must equal the reciprocal of the income elasticity of demand for imports (π) in a balanced 
trade model such as Prebisch’s. Again, we end up with the simple rule that one country’s growth 
rate (g) relative to that of others (z) depends on the ratio of the income elasticity of demand for 
the country’s exports relative to its imports (or the other country’s exports in a two-country 
model), that is, from equation (10.9):
gt
zt
   5   e 
p 
(10.10)
At the country level, there is substantial empirical support for this simple growth rule, 
which is discussed more fully in Chapter 16 in connection with the balance of payments 
and economic development. This growth rule is also known in the literature as Thirlwall’s 
298
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
law, and Krugman’s 45-degree rule, after Thirlwall first showed how well the model fitted 
the growth experience of many countries in the postwar years, and Paul Krugman (1989) 
showed independently that relative price changes have not been an efficient balance of pay-
ments adjustment mechanism and that countries’ growth rates relative to others have been 
equiproportional to the ratio of the income elasticities of demand for imports and exports.5
The new economic geography
The new economic geography, pioneered by Krugman (1991, 1995, 1998), who received the 
Nobel Prize in Economics for his contribution, is also an attempt to explain the geographic pat-
tern of economic development between countries, and between regions within countries, in 
terms of centripetal forces, which lead to industrial concentration, and centrifugal forces, which 
lead to industrial dispersal. In this sense, there is an affinity with the cumulative causation model 
of Myrdal, but in the new economic geography, distance and transport costs play a key role.
There is always a tug of war between centripetal forces, which promote geographic concentra-
tion of activities, and centrifugal forces, which oppose it. The centripetal forces, acting as mag-
nets for activity, are mainly the different types of external economies associated with the size of 
markets and linkages between activities, labour market externalities (pools of skilled labour) and 
pure externalities such as knowledge spillovers. The centrifugal forces, resisting concentration, are 
factors such as the immobility of factors of production, high rents in concentrated areas, and pure 
external diseconomies, such as congestion costs.
Within this framework, the emergence of a ‘centre’ and ‘periphery’, and shifts in the geographic 
pattern of development, can be explained in terms of the changing balance between the pull of 
the market on the one hand and transport costs on the other. As in the Myrdal model, consider 
first two identical regions. If transport costs are very high, each region will be more or less self- 
sufficient. Activity will be widely dispersed serving local markets because it is too costly to trans-
port inputs and outputs elsewhere.
Now suppose that transport costs start to fall. It becomes more economical for some regions to 
supply the needs of others. Those regions with some small initial advantage, as a result of geography 
or historical accident, will tend to capitalize on that advantage, exporting to the less favoured region 
and driving out business. Activity becomes concentrated in a core (or centre), leaving a run-down 
Nicholas Kaldor
Born 1908, Budapest, Hungary. Died 1986. Lecturer and Reader at the London 
School of Economics 1931–49; then a Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge 
from 1950 and Professor of Economics from 1966. Economic adviser to three 
British chancellors of the exchequer between 1964 and 1979; tax adviser to 
many developing countries. Joint architect with Joan Robinson, Richard Kahn 
and Luigi Pasinetti of post-Keynesian growth and distribution theory, and 
strong critic of neoclassical equilibrium economics. Famous for his sectoral 
approach to explaining why growth rates differ between countries. Given a 
peerage in 1974 as Baron Kaldor of Newham in the city of Cambridge.
299
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
­
‘periphery’ with only agricultural and service-type activities. A small initial difference between regions 
leads to a much larger difference in outcomes through the forces of cumulative causation based on 
external economies associated particularly with market size (agglomeration economies). At the 
regional level, Italy is a good case study. When the railway was introduced and transport costs fell, this 
made it possible for the factories of northern Italy to supply the needs of less competitive southern Italy, 
causing the heavy concentration of industrial activity in the north and deindustrialization of the south.
The periphery, however, will tend to have low production costs, particularly low wage costs 
because of high unemployment and underemployment. At some point, if transport costs fall even 
more, it may become economical to shift production from the centre to the periphery because 
low production costs now outweigh the cost of transport to the market. This is one important 
reason why, in recent years, there has been a major shift of the world’s manufacturing base from 
the core of Europe and North America to the periphery of Southeast Asia.
This set of ideas outlined above helps to explain the historical evolution of divisions between 
regions and countries of the world, which can spontaneously emerge with better communica-
tions, and then go into reverse when transport costs fall even lower (Krugman and Venables, 
1995). It is not, however, an equilibrium world; it is an ever-changing world in which economic 
development in some regions or countries may be precluded altogether.
The World Bank’s (2009) World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography is 
devoted to this topic and argues that even though in the present circumstances of the world 
economy, economic growth will be unbalanced (leading to divergence), development can still be 
inclusive but governments must promote integration through spatially connective infrastructure, 
spatially targeted incentives and appropriate institutions. The disadvantaged regions (countries) 
are those that are too small to reap internal and external economies of scale and to attract invest-
ment in labour-intensive manufacturing specializing in some part of the productive chain.
Attempts have been made to quantify the impact of distance and transport costs on the level 
and growth of per capita income of countries across the world, as well as the effect of other geo-
graphic variables (e.g. Gallup et al., 1998). Looking at a map of the world by income, two striking 
relationships are apparent:
1.	 Countries located close to the sea have higher per capita incomes (PCY) than landlocked 
countries.
2.	 Countries located in the tropics are poorer than countries outside the tropics.
3.	 A third fact (although not visible) is that the coastal, temperate regions of the northern hemi-
sphere have the highest income per square kilometre (km) of land (i.e. PCY 3 population ­
density).
The regions of North America, Western Europe (and parts of East Asia) that lie within 100 km of the 
sea contain 13% of the world’s population and produce 32% of the world’s output of goods and ser-
vices. The explanation lies in the factors discussed above. Regions near the sea have lower transport 
costs so they can benefit from greater trade and specialization, and the greater densities of population 
lead to agglomeration economies and increasing returns. Today, the fastest-growing developing coun-
tries have based their growth on labour-intensive manufactured exports located in coastal regions.
Gallup et al. (1998) run regressions across a large sample of countries of the level and growth 
of PCY against several geographic variables, including:
•
• the percentage of land in the tropics
•
• the proportion of the population within 100 km of the coast
•
• the minimum distance of a country to one of three core ‘regions’ (New York, Rotterdam and Tokyo)
•
• the incidence of malaria
300
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
•
• transport costs of a country, measured (imperfectly) as the difference between the cost of im-
ports free on board and their cost including insurance and freight charges.
The level of PCY is found to be negatively related to location in the tropics, malaria, distance and 
transport costs; and positively related to the proportion of the population close to the sea. The 
growth of income (holding other variables constant such as education, trade openness) is shown 
to be 0.9 percentage points (p.p.) less in tropical countries than non-tropical countries; 1.2 p.p. 
less in countries severely affected by malaria; and 1.0 p.p. less in landlocked countries compared 
with coastal countries. Distance also significantly reduces growth if the trade openness variable is 
excluded from the equations.
Given these findings, it is hardly surprising that Africa has some of the poorest and most stag-
nant economies in the world. Geography is stacked against it.
Theories of dependence and unequal exchange
Apart from the ideas of circular and cumulative causation and balance of payments constrained 
growth, there are also a number of theories and models in the Marxist tradition (many originating 
from Latin America and France) concerned with dependency, exploitation and unequal exchange. 
These theories attempt to explain the perpetuation and widening of the differences between centre 
and periphery, and may be regarded as complementary to, and an integral part of, the mechanisms we 
have been discussing. For example, part of the dependency and unequal exchange relation is related 
to the characteristics of trade; but there are many other important dimensions to the argument:
•
• the dependence of the periphery on foreign capital and the expropriation of the surplus by the 
centre
•
• the dependence on foreign technology
•
• terms of trade deterioration
•
• mechanisms that reduce real wages in developing countries to below what they would other-
wise be
•
• various sociocultural aspects of neocolonialism that thwart the drive for independence and 
self-reliance.
Pioneer Marxist writers in this tradition include Theotonio dos Santos, Paul Baran, Gunder 
Frank, Samir Amin and Arghiri Emmanuel. It should be emphasized at the outset that depend-
ency theory cannot easily be tested empirically; rather, it is designed to provide a framework of 
ideas to accommodate the many aspects and features of the functioning of the world capitalist 
economy and the many types of dominance and dependency.
Dos Santos (1970) defines dependence thus:
by dependence we mean a situation in which the economy of certain countries is conditioned 
by the development and expansion of another economy to which the former is subjected. 
[The relation is such that] some countries (the dominant ones) can expand and can be self-
sustaining, while others (the dependent ones) can do this only as a reflection of expansion, 
which can have either a positive or a negative effect on their intermediate development.
Unequal development must be seen as an integral part of the world capitalist system. Inequality 
is inevitable because development of some parts of the system occurs at the expense of others. 
The monopoly power over trade that is exercised by the centre leads to the transfer of the eco-
nomic surplus from the dependent countries to the centre, and financial relations that are based 
301
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
on loans and the export of capital by the centre ultimately lead to reverse flows and strengthen 
the position of the dominant country in the dependent country.
Different forms of dependence can be distinguished, as they have evolved historically:
1.	 Colonial dependence, based on trade and the exploitation of natural resources.
2.	 Financial–industrial dependence, which consolidated itself at the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury and has geared the economic structure of dependent nations to the needs of the centre.
3.	 Technological–industrial dependence, a new type of dependence that emerged from 1945 
based on multinational corporations, which began to invest in industries geared to the internal 
market of developing countries.
Dos Santos (1970) argues that each of these forms of dependence has so conditioned the internal 
structure of peripheral countries, that this itself has become part of the dependency relation; for 
example, the highly dualistic structure, the income inequality and conspicuous consumption of 
the wealthy classes, a dependency mentality and the ingrained habit of seeking outside help, and 
the unholy alliance between the domestic ruling elite and foreign interests all conspire to impede 
internal development. Thus, dos Santos (1973) maintains that dependency is not simply an exter-
nal phenomenon; it also has to do with the supportive power groups within the poor countries 
themselves who find the status quo profitable:
if dependency defines the internal situation and is structurally linked to it, a country cannot 
break out of it simply by isolating herself from external influence; such action would sim-
ply provoke chaos in a society which is of its essence dependent. The only solution therefore 
would be to change its internal structure; a course which necessarily leads to confrontation 
with the existing international structure.
Baran (1957), Frank (1967) and Amin (1974) focus their attention more squarely on the trad­
itional Marxist mechanisms by which capitalism in general, and international capitalism in par-
ticular, aid the rich in exploiting the poor. Emphasis is placed on the expropriation and transfer of 
the surplus produced by labour to the owners of capital, which operates at different levels. Think 
of a cone, the base of which represents the rural poor producing a surplus from their labours in 
the fields or down the mines. This surplus is first siphoned off by those in the provincial towns, by 
small employers and merchants. In turn, the wealth of these towns is sapped by the capital cities, 
and finally, part of this wealth is siphoned away by foreign investors, who repatriate it to the apex 
of the cone – the rich world. The multinational corporations are seen as the modern instrument 
for the expropriation of surplus value. Neo-Marxists allow for a residue of surplus, but argue that if 
it is reinvested in the periphery or left in the hands of local elites, it will not be used appropriately 
for development purposes. As in dos Santos’s model, the system hinges on the collaboration of 
the governing elite who live in the capital city, who think like, and identify with, their ex-colonial 
masters. So, poor countries, despite formal political independence, remain locked into an old 
system of economic dependence that perpetuates underdevelopment.
For Frank (1967), like dos Santos, underdevelopment is a natural outcome of the world capital-
ist system since the development of some countries inevitably means the distorted development 
or underdevelopment of others. Development itself perpetuates underdevelopment, a process that 
Frank has called the development of underdevelopment. Frank sees the origins of the process in 
colonization, which started as a form of economic exploitation and has distorted the economic struc-
ture of developing countries ever since. Developing countries were forced into the position of being 
suppliers of raw materials to industrial countries, thus effectively blocking industrial development in 
the primary producing countries themselves. The whole export orientation and foreign dominance of 
302
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
these countries has limited the growth of the domestic market and the establishment of basic national 
industries for widespread development throughout the whole economy. The international, national 
and local capitalist systems alike generate economic development for the few and underdevelopment 
for the many. The solution would appear to be nothing short of social and political revolution.
Unequal exchange
The theory of unequal exchange owes its name to Arghiri Emmanuel (1972). Exchange is unequal 
between rich and poor countries because wages are lower in poor countries, and lower than if the 
rate of proﬁt in poor countries was not as high as in rich countries. In other words, exchange is 
unequal in relation to a situation where wages would be equalized: ‘Inequality of wages as such, all 
other things being equal, is alone the cause of the inequality of exchange’ (Emmanuel, 1972). Let 
us illustrate the model diagrammatically and show its aﬃnity with the ideas of those who stress 
the terms of trade as the main mechanism through which the gains from exchange are unequally 
distributed. Let us take two countries and call them ‘centre’ (c) and ‘periphery’ (p). Assume that 
prices in the two countries are based on a percentage mark-up (r) on unit labour costs, so that:
Pc 5 wca L
O b
c
a1 1 rcb
and:
Pp 5 wpa L
O b
p
 a1 1 rpb 
where w is the money wage rate, and wL/O is wage costs per unit of output. Now assume that for 
institutional reasons wc . wp and that the mark-up or rate of proﬁt equalizes between the two 
countries. The theory of unequal exchange says that because of this, the terms of trade will be 
worse for the periphery than if wages in the periphery were higher and the rate of proﬁt lower. 
This can be illustrated diagrammatically, taking the price of the centre’s goods as the numéraire, 
so that Pc 5 1 (see Figure 10.4).
In the centre, the given rate of proﬁt (r 
-) and wage rate (wc) give a constant price (Pc), which acts as 
numéraire (hence the horizontal line, wc). In the periphery, at a given wage (wp), there is a positive relation 
wp
r
r1
wc
P1
P2
 
wp
1
(periphery)
Rate of
profit (r )
(centre)
Terms of
trade
(P = 
Pp
 
Pc)
0
Figure 10.4 The theory of unequal exchange
303
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
between the rate of profit and terms of trade (P), given by the upward-sloping line wp. The equilibrium 
terms of trade is given at P1. An increase in periphery wages shifts the periphery curve rightwards to wP
1, 
giving a new terms of trade, P2, at the same rate of profit. Unequal exchange is measured as the difference 
between the actual terms of trade (P1) and what it would be if wages were higher in the periphery and 
the rate of profit was lower at r1. The ‘explanation’ of unequal exchange is unequal wage rates.
The model does not get us very far, however, without understanding why there are wage differences 
between centre and periphery. In Emmanuel’s model, the wage differences are institutionally deter-
mined outside the model, whereas in practice, there are many factors that impinge on wage differ-
ences within the model itself that need consideration. Moreover, money wage differences may not be 
the only factor leading to unequal exchange. If money wage differences between centre and periphery 
reflect differences in labour productivity, the terms of trade between periphery and centre will not be 
nearly as bad as suggested by money wage differences alone. Indeed, if differences in money wages are 
exactly matched by differences in productivity, there will be no difference in money wage costs per unit 
of output and no difference in relative prices ‘caused’ by differences in money wages. There can still be 
unequal exchange in the Emmanuel sense by virtue of the way Emmanuel (1972) defines the concept, 
but if the cause of low wages is low productivity, it is not a simple institutional matter to raise them.6
On the other side of the coin, if there is no good reason why the rate of profit should equal-
ize between the two countries, a higher rate of profit in the centre could be an independent 
source of unequal exchange between centre and periphery, and also an explanation of why 
wages are depressed in the periphery. If account is taken of the characteristics of the goods pro-
duced by the centre and periphery – manufactured goods in the centre subject to decreasing 
costs, and primary commodities in the periphery subject to increasing costs – we can predict 
that oligopolistic structures will develop in the centre, while competitive structures will prevail 
in the periphery, with a tendency, therefore, for the rate of profit to be higher in the centre. The 
lower rate of profit in the periphery, and the attempt by capitalists to keep up the rate of profit 
in the face of competition, leads to the depression of wages in classic Marxist style.
Summary
•
• Disparities in living standards between countries of the world cannot be explained by initial 
(God-given) differences in factor endowments (natural resources) between countries. Through 
time, the process of growth has generated its own factor endowments favouring some coun-
tries more than others.
•
• Geographic differences in living standards between countries and between regions within 
countries are referred to as ‘geographic dualism’.
•
• Within most developing countries, there are other forms of dualism. There is ‘social dualism’ 
between how individuals behave and how markets function in the rural subsistence sector on 
the one hand and the modern capitalist sector on the other. There is ‘technological dualism’, 
relating to differences in the level of technology and differences in techniques of production 
between the rural and modern sectors of the economy.
•
• Orthodox theory argues that when economic and social differences arise between sectors or 
regions, forces will come into play to narrow the differences. That is the equilibrium story.
•
• Myrdal’s theory of circular and cumulative causation is a challenge to static equilibrium theory. 
In particular, in the case of geographic dualism, he argues that the process of labour migration, 
capital movements and trade tend to widen regional and country differences in income and 
welfare, by benefiting the already prosperous regions at the expense of the poorer regions.
304
T H E  P E R P E T U AT I O N  O F  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
 
t Structural diﬀerences between regions and between countries play a big part in the process of 
DVNVMBUJWFDBVTBUJPOʾFCBTJTPG1SFCJTDITDFOUSFoQFSJQIFSZNPEFMJTUIBUUIFQFSJQIFSZTQFDJBM-
izes in primary products with unfavourable demand characteristics in world markets and declining 
terms of trade, while the centre specializes in higher value-added industrial and service activities.
 
t The export-led growth model of Kaldor has cumulative features, which shows how once a region 
or country gets an advantage in the production and export of particular goods with favourable 
characteristics, it will sustain it through the impact that growth has on induced productivity 
growth and competitiveness (Verdoorn’s law).
 
t The new economic geography pioneered by Krugman shows how centripetal forces (which 
work towards the spatial concentration of industrial activities) and centrifugal forces (which 
work towards dispersal) depend on the balance between transport costs of importing inputs 
and exporting output on the one hand, and increasing returns to geographic specialization (ag-
glomeration economies) on the other.
 
t The dependence of poor countries on the rich is another explanation given for divisions in the 
world economy. Dependency theorists focus on various forms of exploitation of poor countries 
by rich ones: in the old days by colonialism, and today by industrial and ﬁnancial imperialism. 
Multinational corporations are criticized for siphoning oﬀ proﬁts from the periphery to the 
centre, and the world’s banking system is attacked for serving the needs of global ﬁnance rather 
than global development. Trade can also lead to unequal exchange through a deterioration in 
the terms of trade between primary commodities and industrial goods.
1. What do you understand by the terms ‘technological dualism’, ‘social dualism’ and 
‘geographic dualism’?
2. Is dualism avoidable in the development process?
3. In what ways might dualism impede the functioning of the total economy?
4. In what senses is Myrdal’s theory of circular and cumulative causation a challenge 
to static equilibrium theory?
5. What are the mechanisms through which the process of circular and cumulative 
causation work?
6. If backward regions suﬀer ‘backwash’ eﬀects from regions of expansion, would 
they be better oﬀ as sovereign states?
7. What is the so-called ‘Verdoorn eﬀect’ and what is its importance in the process 
of circular and cumulative causation?
8. 8IBUEPUIFDFOUSFoQFSJQIFSZ	PS/PSUIo4PVUI
NPEFMTCZ1SFCJTDI%JYPOBOE
Thirlwall, and Kaldor all have in common?
9. How does distance, and transport costs, aﬀect the geographical pattern of eco-
nomic development?
10. What are the various ‘Marxist’ explanations of the divergence between rich and 
poor countries?
11. What do you understand by the theory of unequal exchange?
Discussion questions
Chapter 10
304
305
1 0  •  D U A L I S M ,  C E N T R E – P E R I P H E R Y  M O D E L S
Notes
1.  First hinted at in Prebisch (1950) and developed in Prebisch (1959).
2.  The income elasticity of demand for goods measures the proportionate change in demand for a 
good with respect to a proportionate change in income, holding other things constant.
3.  The model is discussed more fully in Dixon and Thirlwall (1975) and Thirlwall (2014).
4.  Under certain circumstances, the growth rate may not converge to its equilibrium level. This 
depends on the behaviour of the model out of equilibrium. See Dixon and Thirlwall (1975).
5.  Krugman, however, reverses the direction of causation. In the model presented here, it is differences 
in income elasticities that determine differences in growth rates, while in Krugman, it is unexplained 
differences in growth rates that cause divergences in income elasticities. For a comprehensive 
review and discussion of the models, see McCombie and Thirlwall (1994, 2004) and Soukiakis and 
Cerqueira (2012).
6.  Within this framework, movements in the terms of trade can be seen as the outcome of differences 
in the movement of productivity on the one hand and whether money wage changes fully match 
productivity changes on the other. If money wage increases fail to match productivity increases in 
the periphery, for example, so that real wages do not rise as fast as productivity, whereas they do 
in the centre, there will be a steady deterioration in the terms of trade of the periphery. This is the 
essence of the Prebisch argument (see Chapter 15).
