243
•
• Introduction
•
• The role of institutions
•
• Measuring institutions and the debate on institutions versus geography
•
• The role of democracy
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Note
•
• Websites on institutions and market behaviour
THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONS 
IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
8
244
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Introduction
Growth and development cannot take place in an institutional vacuum. Economic maturity and 
the growth of markets require an institutional framework that allows transactions to take place in 
an orderly manner and in which agents know that the decisions they take and the contracts they 
make will be protected by law, and enforced. Savers, investors, consumers, entrepreneurs, workers 
and risk-takers of all kinds need a framework of rules if rational, optimizing decisions are to be 
made. They also need some guarantee of economic stability and certainty, which can be provided 
only by good governance and sound economic policy-making. The alternative to property rights, 
law and order and political stability is economic anarchy – and failed states (see Chapter 9).
This chapter deals with the role of formal institutions in general in providing an economic, 
political and social environment in which economies can flourish and prosper, and it considers 
some of the empirical evidence on the relationship between institutional development and eco-
nomic development.
The role of institutions
Nobel Prize-winning economist Douglass North first brought to the fore the role of institutions 
in economic development. The modern exponents of the primacy of institutions are Dani 
Rodrik of Harvard University and Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson and James Robinson of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In his well-known book, Institutions, Institutional Change 
and Economic Performance (1990), North said:
I wish to assert a fundamental role for institutions in societies: they are the underlying deter-
minants of the long-run performance of economies – Third World countries are poor because 
the institutional constraints define a set of pay-offs to political/economic activity that do not 
encourage productive activity.
North (1990) also said that ‘the inability of societies to develop effective low-cost enforcement of 
contracts is the most important source of both historical stagnation and contemporary under-
development in the Third World’, because the absence of secure property and contractual rights 
discourages investment and specialization. Mancur Olson (1982) makes the same point in his 
classic book, The Rise and Decline of Nations.
It is possible to give both general and narrower, more formal, definitions of institutions. North 
(1990) describes institutions very broadly as the ‘formal and informal rules [or norms] governing 
human behaviour’. A similar broad definition is given by Lin and Nugent (1995): ‘a set of humanly 
devised behavioural rules that govern and shape the interaction of human beings, in part by help-
ing them to form expectations of what other people do’. At a more formal, precise, level, institu-
tions can be defined in terms of:
•
• the extent of property rights’ protection
•
• the degree to which laws and regulations are fairly enforced
•
• the ability of government to protect the individual against economic shocks and provide social 
protection
•
• the extent of political corruption.
Without inclusive economic and political institutions, nations will fail, which is the central 
message of the path-breaking book by Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), Why Nations Fail. Inclusive 
245
8  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  I N S T I T U T I O N S  I N   E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
institutions are necessary to challenge and constrain the political power of the elite, otherwise the 
elite use political power to protect the status quo and preserve extractive economic rents, which 
diminishes the incentive to innovate and invest. Inclusive political institutions lead to inclusive 
economic institutions and this is the basis for prosperity – a virtuous circle is started. Similarly, 
extractive rules are reinforcing in the opposite direction – plunder further empowers the elite. 
Countries differ in their economic success because of their different institutions; the rules influ-
ence how the economy works and the incentives that motivate people. Institutions explain 
why growth took off earlier in Europe than Africa, Latin America and Asia, and why there are 
many failed states today, particularly in Africa where autocracy is rife and the benefits of natur­
al 
resources are siphoned off to an elite.
Incentives and price signals, so vital for a market economy, cannot function properly without 
institutional structures and rules of behaviour. As Rodrik (2008) says: ‘markets require institutions 
because they are not self-creating, self-regulating, self-stabilising, or self-legitimising’. Which insti-
tutions are important and which are not will differ across space and time according to the history 
of a country, its geography, stage of development and its political aspirations, that is, what sort of 
society its people want. In small rural communities where everyone knows each other, the scope 
for cheating, fraud and not honouring contracts is limited. Transaction costs associated with the 
costs of information, negotiation, monitoring, coordination and enforcement of contracts are 
low, and communities survive by adhering to norms of behaviour; but economic development is 
limited through a lack of specialization. In contrast, in large, modern, industrial societies, where 
transactions are impersonal, there is widespread scope for opportunistic behaviour (Bardhan and 
Udry, 1999). Transactions (and therefore production) costs may be very high without institutional 
structures that curtail such behaviour, such as the enforcement of property rights and the rule 
of law, the provision of limited liability, the guarantee of contracts, patent protection and so on. 
With low transaction costs, firms and markets can concentrate on the job of investment in the 
knowledge that property rights are secure.
When economists undertake empirical work on the relation between institutional structure 
and economic performance, it is, of course, necessary to have quantitative measures of the import­
ant institutions being discussed and evaluated. Lumping all institutions together in a single index 
of ‘institutional quality’ would obscure the different channels through which institutions work.
There is no one set of institutions that will suit all countries, but there is a consensus among 
development economists that at least five main types of market-supporting institutions are nec-
essary, if not sufficient, conditions for rapid economic progress (see Rodrik, 2000, 2008; Rodrik and 
Subramanian, 2008):
•
• property rights and legally binding contracts: market-creating institutions
•
• regulatory institutions: market-regulating institutions
•
• institutions for macroeconomic stability: market-stabilizing institutions
•
• social insurance institutions: market-legitimizing institutions
•
• institutions of conflict management: market-legitimizing institutions.
Rodrik (2000) highlights the following institutional arrangements that are conspicuously 
absent in poor countries:
•
• a clearly defined system of property rights
•
• a regulatory apparatus curbing the worst forms of fraud, anti-competitive behaviour and moral 
hazard
•
• a moderately cohesive society exhibiting trust and social cooperation
246
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
•
• social and political institutions that mitigate risk and manage social conflict
•
• the rule of law and clean government.
These five main prerequisites of a sound institutional structure for economic development are 
described briefly below:
1.	 Property rights and legally binding contracts: These are important because agents lack the 
incentive to invest and innovate if they do not have control over the return on the assets they 
accumulate. Intellectual property rights are particularly important to encourage invention. 
Control is more important than ownership. Formal property rights do not mean very much if 
there are not control rights; but control rights can spur entrepreneurial activity without clearly 
defined property rights (witness China).
2.	 Regulatory institutions: Markets fail if there is fraud or anti-competitive behaviour. Regula-
tory institutions are needed if markets are to function properly. When markets are liberalized, 
a regulatory framework is also required to avoid the consequences of risky behaviour, such 
as financial crises if the banking system is not properly regulated (as the world economy wit-
nessed in 2008). Institutions to compensate for capital market imperfections and coordination 
failures must also be an integral part of a ‘regulatory’ framework for promoting innovation 
and growth. A good example of this is the way the state intervened to promote industrial de-
velopment in South Korea and Taiwan in the 1960s and 1970s. All successful economies have 
an array of regulatory institutions that oversee different markets, such as the product market, 
financial markets and the labour market. Developing countries may need more regulatory in-
stitutions because market failures are more pervasive than in developed countries.
3.	 Institutions for macroeconomic stability: Monetary and fiscal policy institutions are neces-
sary to provide an enabling environment in which private investment can flourish. Market 
economies are not self-regulating, and macroeconomic instability creates risk and uncertainty. 
The minimization of risk is vital if entrepreneurs are to take informed, long-term investment 
decisions. Financial markets are inherently unstable, which can have damaging real effects, and 
they need careful supervision. A central bank, a responsible banking system and fiscal pru-
dence are all important ingredients of macroeconomic stability.
4.	 Social insurance institutions: These are necessary if individuals are to accept change. In rural, 
peasant societies on the margins of subsistence, change may spell disaster, but progress (par-
ticularly in agriculture) requires a willingness to take risks. Insurance against unemployment, 
crop failures and price fluctuations for agricultural commodities are all important if traditional 
agriculture is to be transformed. Economic reforms of any type, particularly in the process 
of liberalizing markets, will meet resistance if not enough attention is paid to creating social 
security institutions to protect the vulnerable. Social stability and cohesion within a market 
economy in the process of structural change require social insurance and safety nets.
5.	 Institutions of conflict management: Many developing countries have deep ethnic, tribal 
and religious divisions. Social conflict damages economies because it diverts resources from 
directly productive activities and creates uncertainty, which deters investment. To minimize 
conflict requires a full range of institutions – the rule of law, a fair legal system, a political voice 
for minority groups – which make it clear that the potential winners of social conflict will not 
benefit and potential losers will be properly safeguarded.
The question is: How are good institutions acquired? Because of history and the diversity of 
countries, there is no one unique set of institutions that can be prescribed for every country: 
‘there is no single mapping between the market and the set of non-market institutions required to 
247
8  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  I N S T I T U T I O N S  I N   E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
sustain it’ (Rodrik, 2000). Rodrik likens institutions to technical progress that allows countries to 
transform inputs into higher levels of output, shifting outwards a country’s production possibility 
frontier. But technological blueprints that operate well in one context may not be appropriate in 
another – and so it is with institutions. A ‘market economy’ cannot simply be transposed from 
one country to another, at least not without some adaptation. As Rodrik and Subramanian (2008) 
put it: ‘there is growing evidence that desirable institutional arrangements have a large element of 
context specificity arising from differences in historical trajectories, geography, political economy 
and other initial conditions ... institutional innovations do not necessarily travel well’.
Nor is it easy to bring about institutional change. There is a collective action problem that 
limits potential gainers from bringing about change in opposition to vested interests (Bardhan 
and Udry, 1999). One is the free-rider problem about sharing the cost of change; the other is 
the bargaining problem relating to sharing the potential benefits of change. It can be difficult 
for potential gainers to compensate potential losers, as in the case of land reform, for example. In 
these circumstances, the state has a role to play in fostering institutional change and development 
without destroying markets, or allowing itself to be influenced by special interest groups or cor-
rupted by rent-seeking behaviour on the part of politicians and bureaucrats.
Rodrik (2000) argues forcefully that ‘institutions need to be developed locally, relying on 
hands-on experience, local knowledge and experimentation’. Some institutional blueprints for 
some specific purposes may be borrowed (e.g. forms of financial regulation) because they are 
straightforward to implement and save costs, but others need to be built from scratch. Building 
from the ‘bottom up’ requires participatory political institutions that can use and assess local 
knowledge, so that the institutions created have consent and legitimacy. Institutions imposed 
from the ‘top down’ usually fail. Rodrik (2000) finds an association across countries between dem-
ocratic political structures and economic success; but other studies are more agnostic.
Measuring institutions and the debate on institutions versus geography
To do serious empirical work on the impact of institutions on growth and development requires 
a measure of institutional development. But some care needs to be taken because if measures of 
institutional quality are used, a correlation with economic performance is almost certain to be found 
because the measures themselves are partly a function of the stage of development and economic 
success. Institutional measures are required that are devoid of ‘quality’. The statistical way of putting 
the same point is that the institutional variables used should be strictly exogenous; but we know in 
practice that institutional development is partly a function of growth and development itself, making 
many institutional variables endogenous. To cope with this difficulty, one can either find instruments 
to proxy for present-day institutions (see below), or take the initial (or base) level of institutions as 
the independent variable, rather than the contemporaneous level. There are also other econometric 
difficulties in determining the impact of institutions. Many institutional variables are highly corre-
lated with one another, so it is difficult to measure the separate influence of each, and many institu-
tional measures are ordinal (they simply rank countries) rather than cardinal, which means that they 
do not measure the magnitude of the difference in the institutional variables between one country 
and another. Several different measures of institutions have been used in empirical work:
•
• An aggregate governance index, which is an average of six measures of institutions developed 
by Kaufman et al. (1999). These measures include:
•
• voice and accountability: the extent to which citizens can choose their government and enjoy 
political rights, civil liberties and an independent press
248
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
•
• political stability and absence of violence: the likelihood that the government will not be over-
thrown by unconstitutional or violent means
•
• government effectiveness: the quality of public service delivery and competence and political 
independence of the civil service
•
• regulatory burden: the relative absence of government controls on goods markets, banking 
systems and international trade
•
• rule of law: the protection of persons and property against violence and theft, independent 
and effective judges, and contract enforcement
•
• freedom from graft: public power is not abused for private gain or corruption.
Each of these measures can be taken individually.
•
• A measure of property rights and risk of expropriation using the International Country Risk 
Guide (ICRG) and Business Environmental Risk Intelligence (BERI). These indices are used by 
Keefer and Knack (1995). The ICRG index includes a measure of expropriation risk, rule of law, 
repudiation of contracts by governments, corruption in government and quality of bureaucracy. 
The BERI index includes contract enforceability, nationalization potential and bureaucratic delays.
•
• An index of democracy, political rights and civil liberties, for example the Freedom House 
index of political rights and civil liberties (Gastil, 1983, 1986).
•
• Political instability, as measured by the number of revolutions and coups, and the number of 
assassinations (Barro, 1991).
•
• An index of corruption (Transparency International).
•
• Economic freedom (Heritage Foundation).
•
• An index of social division, for example, ethnic diversity.
Apart from Rodrik, Acemoglu et al. (2001, 2002) are the other foremost modern exponents of 
the view that institutions are of primary importance in understanding the development process, 
and why some countries are rich today and others poor. Acemoglu (2008) identifies three impor-
tant characteristics of good institutions:
1.	 The enforcement of property rights and the rule of law, so that individuals have the incentive 
to save, invest and take risks (as argued above).
2.	 Constraints on those in positions of power so that they cannot expropriate the resources of a 
country for their own benefit.
3.	 Equal opportunities for all, so that everyone has the incentive to better themselves and to 
participate productively in society.
Acemoglu and his colleagues believe that the fundamental cause of differences in the levels of 
development across countries of the world lies in differences in the evolution of institutions (in 
particular, property rights), which has historical roots, and that it is possible to find an ex­
ogenous 
cause of variations in institutions today that is unrelated to the level of development itself (or 
geography); namely the way in which colonizers settled in countries in the seventeenth and 
 
eighteenth centuries. This is determined by the mortality rates of soldiers, sailors and missionaries 
in various parts of the world.
The model of institutional development proposed by Acemoglu et al. (2001) is that (potential) 
settler mortality determined the degree of settlement, the degree of settlement determined the 
type of early institutions, and that early institutions have determined current institutions and can 
explain current economic performance. In other words, mortality rates in countries during early 
colonial times can be used for predicting institutions and the level of per capita income across 
countries today.
249
8  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  I N S T I T U T I O N S  I N   E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Let us consider the theory in more detail, and then some of the evidence. The model is based 
on three basic premises:
1.	 There were different colonization policies, which created different types of institutions. At one 
extreme, in some countries (mainly in Africa), ‘extractive states’ were created with the main 
purpose of transferring as many resources as possible from the colony. Private property rights 
were not established and colonizers did not settle in large numbers. At the other extreme, 
in countries such as the USA and Australia, Europeans settled in large numbers and tried to 
replicate European institutions, with a strong emphasis on private property and checking the 
power of elites – political and vested interests.
2.	 The colonization strategy depended, to a large extent, on the feasibility of settlement, and 
particularly the incidence of disease and mortality.
3.	 The institutions created during the colonial period persisted after the colonies became in-
dependent.
Acemoglu et al. (2001) present a mass of evidence of how mortality rates affected the willing-
ness to settle in the various colonies, and how the presence or absence of European settlers was 
a key determinant of the form colonization took. A great deal of historical evidence is also pre-
sented that the control structures set up during the colonial period in the ‘extractive states’ that 
were not settled, such as in Africa and parts of Latin America, have persisted to this day, while the 
institutions of protecting private property rights and law and order, which were established in set-
tler countries such as Australia, Canada, the USA, Hong Kong and Singapore, have also persisted.
The measure of institutions today, used by Acemoglu et al. (2001) is a ‘risk expropriation’ index 
first used by Keefer and Knack (1995).1 The index goes from 0 (lowest protection of property 
rights) to 10 (highest), measured for each country for each year. They test their model using 64 
former colonies for which there are data on settler mortality in the nineteenth century, current 
protection against expropriation risk, and living standards for the period 1985–95. Using simple 
two-variable regressions shows:
1.	 A strong negative correlation between per capita income (PCY) today and settler mortality 
rates per 1,000 of population.
2.	 A strong positive relation between PCY and protection against expropriation risk today (the 
correlation coefficient exceeds 50%).
3.	 That the settler mortality rate explains 25% of the variation in the expropriation risk index.
When the endogeneity of the expropriation risk index (as the measure of institutional quality) is 
instrumented by the settler mortality variable, a significant negative effect on the current level of 
per capita income of countries is found, even controlling for other variables that might be cor-
related with settler mortality, such as the identity of the colonial power, natural resource endow-
ments, soil quality, religion, temperature and humidity. In fact, Acemoglu et al. (2001) dismiss the 
effect of geography altogether (see below). Moreover, the strong results are not dependent on 
the heavily settled countries with good institutions, such as the USA, Canada, Australia and New 
Zealand, nor if African countries are excluded from the sample. When a dummy variable for Africa 
is used in the equation, it is not statistically significant, which leads Acemoglu et al. (2001) to 
conclude that Africa is poor not because of geography but because of poor institutions, inherited 
from the past because the colonial powers established ‘extractive states’.
In a separate analysis, Acemoglu et al. (2002) try to support their theory by showing how the 
fortunes of countries between the sixteenth century and the present have changed because of 
institutional reversal. It is a fact that those countries that were relatively rich in the year 1500 are 
250
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
now relatively poor, and vice versa, and this is attributed to the two different types of institutional 
structures, discussed above, that were imposed on countries during colonial times. Economic 
prosperity in 1500 is measured by the rate of urbanization and population density. With either 
measure, there is a negative relation between prosperity in 1500 and the level of PCY today. The 
explanation given is that in previously poor areas, European colonialism led to the development 
of institutions of private property because the regions were sparsely populated, which enabled 
Europeans to settle in large numbers and develop new institutions to the benefit of all. By con-
trast, in previously prosperous areas, already more densely populated with powerful ruling elites, 
colonizers found it easier and more profitable to maintain or introduce extractive institutions. 
There was a ready workforce available and taxation was relatively easy. Besides, in the more densely 
populated regions, there was more disease and mortality rates were higher. The reversal of relative 
incomes took place in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with societies with good institu-
tions taking advantage of the opportunity to industrialize: ‘the interaction between institutions 
and the opportunity to industrialise during the 19th century played a central role in the long-run 
development of the former colonies’ (Acemoglu et al., 2002). The authors find a negative relation 
between measures of prosperity in 1500 and the risk of expropriation (insecure property rights) 
today. Some basic econometric results are:
•
• a 10 percentage point lower rate of urbanization in 1500 is associated with double the level of 
PCY today
•
• a 10% higher population density in 1500 is associated with a 4% lower PCY today.
Acemoglu et al. (2002) again dismiss the role of geography because geography is a ‘constant’ 
and predicts the persistence of economic outcomes. If geography is the most important factor in 
development, the most (least) prosperous areas prior to colonization should have continued to 
be the most (least) prosperous, but this is not the case. Geography cannot explain the reversal of 
fortunes. Acemoglu et al. (2002) recognize what they call a ‘sophisticated version’ of the geog­
raphy 
hypothesis; that certain geographic characteristics that were inimical to successful economic 
 
performance in 1500 became less important later on when new crops and new technologies 
made temperate zones more productive than the more prosperous tropical zones (where civi­
lization started), and transport costs fell. But they argue that there is no evidence that the rever-
sal of economic fortunes between sets of countries in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
was associated with agriculture or a more favourable transport environment. Reversal was most 
closely related to industrialization. Acemoglu et al. (2002) conclude: ‘if you want to understand 
why a country is poor today, you have to look at institutions rather than its geography’.
But institutions and geography cannot be separated so easily. Geography, and its effects on dis-
ease, affects the type of colonization and therefore the character of institutions. Acemoglu (2008) 
effectively concedes this when he says: ‘geographic factors also likely influenced the institutions that 
Europeans introduced’. Rodrik et al. (2004) attempt to tackle this issue empirically (see also Rodrik 
and Subramanian, 2008). They estimate a series of regressions relating the income levels of coun-
tries to measures of geography, institutions (and also the degree of economic integration), taking 
account of the endogeneity of institutions. Institutional development is measured by a composite 
indicator of the strength of property rights and the rule of law. Rodrik et al. (2004) reach the conclu-
sion that:
Quality of institutions is the only positive and significant determinant of income levels. Once 
institutions are controlled for, integration has no direct effect on income, while geography has 
but weak direct effects. These results are very robust.
251
8  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  I N S T I T U T I O N S  I N   E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Rodrik et al. (2004) claim that the quality of institutions overrides everything else, but also con-
cede, like Acemoglu, that ‘geography has a strong indirect effect through institutions by influen­
cing their quality’. Thus, geography may be the ultimate determinant after all.
In fact, Sachs (2008) points out that the incidence of malaria itself is enough to account for 
the negative relation between the mortality rates of British soldiers in various parts of the world 
in the nineteenth century and low levels of per capita income today. Sachs is critical of the almost 
exclusive emphasis on institutions in explaining differences in economic performance between 
countries, as if nothing else matters: ‘the barriers to economic development in the poorest coun-
tries today are more complex than institutional shortcomings ... both institutions and resource 
endowments are critical, not just one or the other’.
Another critic is Bardhan (2005a), who argues that there are other institutions that matter 
besides property rights and the rule of law, particularly coordinating institutions to overcome 
the coordination failures that are endemic in poor countries and require institutions to cope with 
them. They would remain important even if property rights were secure. In Bardhan’s view: ‘this 
preoccupation of the literature with the institutions of security and property rights, often to the 
exclusion of other important institutions, severely limits our understanding of the development 
process’. Bardhan doubts whether the mortality rate of colonial settlers really captures the major 
historical forces that determined the economic and social structure of colonies.
Think of the differences between countries today all with similar disease environments, such 
as Brazil, India or the Congo in Africa, let alone the countries that were never colonized, such as 
Ethiopia and Thailand. Countries had a history before colonization: Bardhan (2005a) calls this 
state antiquity, a term that refers to whether a country had a unified state structure or not. By 
this criterion, Asia ranks higher than Latin America and Africa, and in the latter, as a result of colo-
nial rule, the postcolonial state was often incongruent with the precolonial political structures 
and geographic boundaries. This has been a major source of political turmoil and instability. In 
statistical analysis, Bardhan finds the state antiquity variable a significant determinant of differ-
ences in per capita income today (as well as settler mortality rates).
The role of democracy
Apart from the institutions versus geography debate, most empirical work on the role of institutions 
in economic development has been conducted on political instability and the impact of political 
structures and the role of democracy. The challenge for any government, whatever its structure, is to 
 
provide leadership in resolving collective action problems (Bardhan, 1993), which means a com-
mitment to formulating and implementing development policies in the interests of all the people, 
to prevent groups going their own separate ways. Democracy can make this more difficult because 
 
politicians can succumb to vested interest groups and take short-term decisions. On the other hand, 
dictatorships may have no interest in maximizing total output, and may allocate resources very 
in­
efficiently. Democracy makes life difficult for corrupt elites. In the discussion of democracy and 
growth, it is also important to distinguish between democracy defined as free, multiparty elections on 
the one hand and civil and economic liberties on the other (Alesina and Perotti, 1994). Some non-dem-
ocratic regimes in the first sense (e.g. China) give their citizens a lot of economic rights, and vice versa.
Early work by Barro (1991) measured institutional quality by the number of revolutions and 
coups in countries and the number of political assassinations. A negative relation was found 
between these measures and economic growth across a sample of 98 countries, controlling for 
other variables (see Chapter 4).
252
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
But political instability is not the same as the nature of the political system. Here, we shall 
highlight two major studies on the role of democracy by Rodrik (2000) and Barro (1996a, 2008). 
Rodrik examines data for 90 countries over the period 1970–89, using the Freedom House index 
of political rights and civil liberties (the Gastil index) as a measure of democracy, which ranks 
countries on a scale of zero to one. Rodrik draws four important conclusions:
•
• democracies deliver more predictable long-run growth rates
•
• democracies produce greater short-term stability
•
• democracies handle adverse shocks much better
•
• democracies promote a fairer distribution of income.
Democracies produce better outcomes in these ways because they produce superior institutions 
better suited to local conditions. There is little evidence that the average growth rate is higher in 
democracies than in more autocratic regimes, but the variance around the average is significantly 
lower in democracies. One reason for this is because adjustment to shocks requires managing 
social conflict, and democratic institutions are more efficient institutions for conflict manage-
ment. Democracies deliver better institutional outcomes because they tend to create more equal 
opportunities for people, especially in the fields of health, education and employment opportun­
ity, which manifests itself in a higher share of wages in national income. In general, therefore, 
democracy helps to build better institutions based on local knowledge: ‘participatory and decen-
tralised political systems are the most effective ones we have for processing and aggregating local 
knowledge. We can think of democracy as a meta-institution for building other good institutions’ 
(Rodrik, 2000).
Barro (2008), on the other hand, is more circumspect about the impact of democracy. Most 
agree that democracy tends to follow economic development, rather than precede it; what is 
debated is the role of democracy in sustaining development once it has started. Barro argues that 
democracy can hamper growth in the early stages of development by the tendency of majority 
voting to support programmes that redistribute income from the rich to the poor, involving tax 
increases and other distortions that reduce incentives. Also, democracies may give in to pres-
sure groups that redistribute resources to themselves; for example, agricultural lobbies, defence 
contractors and trade unions. On the other hand, and very importantly, democracy is a check 
on corrupt autocracies (dictators). In statistical work that examines the link between democracy 
and growth, Barro (2008) measures the degree of democracy using the Gastil index of political 
rights found in Gastil’s publication, Freedom in the World (1983, 1986). The definition of political 
rights is: ‘rights to participate meaningfully in the political process. In a democracy this means the 
right of all adults to vote and compete for public office, and for elected representatives to have a 
decisive vote on public policies.’
Barro’s (2008) results suggest that the relationship between democracy and growth across 
countries is weakly negative, but not statistically significant. The most interesting finding is that 
there is evidence of nonlinearity; that is, more democracy increases growth when political free-
doms are weak, but depresses growth when a moderate degree of freedom has been achieved 
(perhaps because, as said above, democracies give in to pressure groups and engage in more redis-
tribution). Barro (2008) concludes that:
democracy is not the key to economic growth ... advanced Western countries would contrib-
ute more to the welfare of poor nations by exporting their economic systems, notably prop-
erty rights and free markets, rather than their political systems, which typically developed after 
reasonable standards of living had been attained.
253
8  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  I N S T I T U T I O N S  I N   E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
Barro’s conclusion concurs with that of Alesina and Perotti (1994) in their early survey of the 
political economy of growth, when they say: ‘growth is influenced not so much by the nature of 
the political regime (democracy or dictatorship) as by the stability of the political regime ... transi-
tions from dictatorship to democracy, being associated with socio-economic instability, should 
be typically periods of low growth’ (see Case example 8.1).
The current evidence for Africa is that the structure of political institutions influences the 
performance of economies, and that Africa’s shift towards a greater degree of democ-
racy has paid off in terms of improved economic outcomes. The democracy–growth 
 
relationship may, however, be nonlinear. For African economies, the initial transition to 
democracy can be fraught with risks of political disorder. It is only when African coun-
tries have reached ‘advanced-level’ democracy that we can expect increasing democra-
tization to be growth-enhancing.
Resource rents have become a curse for many African economies. Research shows 
that large resource rents lead to more corruption, but that the effect is lower for more 
democratic countries. Nigeria presents a good illustration of the resource curse chal-
lenge. Despite the huge rents that have flowed from oil, there has been little economic 
development; instead, these rents have served to undermine the quality of institutions 
and to lower growth. To avoid institutions themselves becoming corroded by resource 
rents and undermining democracy, oil revenues could be distributed directly to the 
public. Nigeria has become more democratic since 2000, and there has been improve-
ment in government effectiveness, regulatory quality, the rule of law, and the control 
of corruption, but, unfortunately, political stability and the absence of violence have 
deteriorated significantly, consistent with the observation that greater democracy may 
be associated with a higher risk of conflict – at least in the short-term.
Source: Based on Fosu, 2013.
Case example 8.1
Institutions and African economies
The historical evidence for the now-developed countries, as documented by Chang (2003), 
would seem to support this broad conclusion. He considers six categories of institutions as they were 
 
in nineteenth-century developed countries – democracy, bureaucracy (including the judiciary), 
property rights, corporate governance institutions, financial institutions, and welfare and labour 
institutions – and reaches the following conclusions:
1.	 The now-developed countries did not develop on the basis of democracy. Universal suffrage 
only came in the twentieth century. Poor developing countries today are adopting suffrage at 
much lower levels of income than in now-developed countries.
2.	 Public offices and the judiciary were historically corrupt. Appointments were made not on 
merit, but through class or political connections, and the judiciary often lacked independence, 
dispensing justice according to class and race.
3.	 Property rights, such as contract law, company law, bankruptcy law, tax law and land law, were 
all lax historically. So, too, were intellectual property rights. Chang remarks with respect to 
patents, copyrights and trademarks: ‘the protection fell well short of what is demanded in 
developing countries today’.
254
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
4.	 In most now-developed countries, modern corporate governance structures emerged after, 
rather than before, industrial development. There was no proper auditing of companies and 
no bankruptcy law, and competition laws did not properly exist until the twentieth century.
5.	 Banking regulation in the nineteenth century was very perfunctory, and banks only became 
professional lending institutions, serving all the people, in the early twentieth century.
6.	 Social security institutions to protect against change were virtually nonexistent.
The lessons of history are that many institutions deemed to be important for poor developing 
countries today emerged after, not before, economic development was taking place, and it took a 
long time for them to emerge in fully fledged form from the time of their perceived need. Chang 
(2003) is right to conclude, however, that this does not mean ‘the clock should be turned back’; 
rather, that institutional development is not the sine qua non of economic development, and 
institutional reforms in developing countries should not be imposed from outside, but should be 
allowed to evolve naturally, internally.
This would accord with the central conclusion of Rodrik (2000), namely everything we know 
about economic growth indicates that large-scale institutional transformation is not so neces-
sary for getting growth started, but that it is very important for sustaining it. This conclusion 
is based on the pioneering research by Hausmann et al. (2005) on ‘growth accelerations’. The 
secret of economic success in the early stages of development is to find the ‘binding constraints’ 
on growth using ‘growth diagnostics’ (see Chapter 4). This does not require wholesale institu-
tional reform.
Summary
•
• Institutional structures and rules of behaviour are a necessary condition for economic activity 
to flourish because incentives and price signals in a market economy cannot function properly 
without them.
•
• There are at least five main types of market-supporting institutions that are necessary, if not suf-
ficient, conditions for rapid economic progress: property rights and legally binding contracts; 
regulatory institutions; social insurance institutions; institutions for conflict management; and 
institutions to secure macroeconomic stability.
•
• Poor countries are often characterized by a lack of trust and the rule of law; weak institutions 
to mitigate risk and manage social conflict; no clearly defined system of property rights; an 
inadequate regulatory apparatus to curb fraud and anti-competitive behaviour; and a lack of 
clean government.
•
• Without property rights and the rule of law, the incentive to invest, on which economic growth 
ultimately depends, is very weak.
•
• It is not easy to bring about institutional change. There is a collective action problem, which 
limits potential gainers from bringing about change in opposition to vested interests, including 
the free-rider problem and the bargaining problem of distributing the gains.
•
• It is not easy to measure institutional development and its impact on economic performance 
because institutional development itself is endogenous to economic development. An ex­
ogenous measure of institutions is required.
•
• Several different measures of institutions have been used in empirical work, such as a meas-
ure of property rights and risk of expropriation; an aggregate governance index; an index of 
255
8  •  T H E  R O L E  O F  I N S T I T U T I O N S  I N   E C O N O M I C  D E V E L O P M E N T
­
democracy, political rights and civil liberties; an index of political instability; an index of corrup-
tion; an index of economic freedom; and an index of social division.
•
• The economists Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson believe that the fundamental cause of differ-
ences in the level of development across countries in the world today is the historical evolution 
of institutions, and that in those parts of the world where conditions were harsh, in Africa for 
example, colonizers created ‘extractive states’ with no firm property rights, while in other parts 
(e.g. the USA and Australia) colonizers settled in large numbers and built institutions conducive 
 
to development. Disease and mortality rates in the nineteenth century are taken as an ex­
ogenous institutional variable. The role of geography (a constant) is dismissed.
•
• If geography was the most important factor in development, the most (least) prosperous areas 
prior to colonization should have continued to be the most (least) prosperous, but this is not 
the case. On the other hand, geography, and its effects on disease and mortality, affected the 
type of colonization and thus the character of institutions. The role of geography is therefore 
controversial.
•
• Apart from the debate on institutions versus geography, most of the empirical work on the role 
of institutions in economic development has been conducted on the influence of democracy 
and political stability on economic performance.
•
• Rodrik finds that democracies deliver more predictable long-run growth rates, produce greater 
short-term stability, handle adverse shocks better, and promote a fairer distribution of income 
than non-democratic states.
•
• Chang shows, however, that the lessons of history are that many of the institutions that are 
argued to be important for developing countries today emerged after, not before, economic 
development was taking place; for example, democracy and property rights, contract law, com-
pany law, bankruptcy law and tax law. His message is that institutions should be allowed to 
evolve naturally, internally, and not be imposed from outside.
1.	 Why are institutional structures and rules of behaviour a necessary condition for 
economic activity to flourish?
2.	 What institutions do you think are the most important for encouraging invest-
ment in developing countries?
3.	 What is the importance of local knowledge in building appropriate institutions?
4.	 What are the major empirical problems of testing the relationship between insti-
tutions and economic development?
5.	 Briefly describe the Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson theory of the link between 
colonialism, institutions and economic development.
6.	 Is it possible to distinguish the role of institutions and geography in explaining 
differences in the level of development between countries?
7.	 In what ways can democracy help and hinder economic development?
Discussion questions
Chapter 8
256
F A C T O R S  I N  T H E  ­
D E V E L O P M E N T  P R O C E S S
Note
1.	 Keefer and Knack’s (1995) early study examined the impact of property rights on economic growth 
across countries in the period 1974–89, using composite indices of contract enforceability and risk 
of expropriation, and found a strong positive effect of property rights; stronger than the effect of 
political instability or measures of civil liberties.
Websites on institutions and market behaviour
Transparency International www.transparency.org
Heritage Foundation www.heritage.org
Center for Global Development www.cgdev.org
Freedom House https://freedomhouse.org/
