93
•
• Introduction
•
• Classical growth theory
•
• The Harrod–Domar growth model
•
• Neoclassical growth theory
•
• The production function approach to the analysis of growth
•
• Production function studies of developing countries
•
• ‘New’ (endogenous) growth theory and the macrodeterminants of growth
•
• ‘Growth diagnostics’ and binding constraints on growth
•
• Summary
•
• Discussion questions
•
• Notes
•
• Websites on growth theory
THEORIES OF ECONOMIC 
GROWTH: OLD AND NEW
4
94
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Introduction
Growth and development theory is as old as economics itself. The great classical economists of 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were, in a sense, all development economists writing 
about forces determining the progress of nations as the countries of Europe embarked on the 
process of industrialization. The most famous of the early classical economists was Adam Smith, 
who published a path-breaking book in 1776 entitled An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the 
Wealth of Nations. This work is still widely cited today because Smith recognized how specializa-
tion in industrial activities could lead to increasing returns and big increases in labour productiv-
ity, compared with specialization in agriculture.
In this chapter we examine how theories of growth and development have evolved through time 
from the classical economists to modern-day thinking about factors that determine the pace of 
economic growth. Other great classical economists, apart from Smith, were Thomas Malthus, David 
Ricardo and John Stuart Mill, who were all pessimistic about the growth and development process 
because of the pressure of population on food supply and diminishing returns in agriculture, which, 
they argued, would reduce the rate of profit in industry. Eventually, a stationary state would be 
reached. Even more pessimistic was Karl Marx, who predicted the collapse of capitalism itself.
Modern growth theory started with (Sir) Roy Harrod’s well-known 1939 paper, ‘An Essay in 
Dynamic Theory’ (Harrod, 1939). His main purpose was to make dynamic Keynes’ static theory 
of income determination. In doing so, he showed how unstable economies can be in the short 
run, and how, in the long run, it is possible for countries to experience either prolonged periods of 
secular stagnation if the supply of saving exceeds the demand for it, or structural unemployment 
if the growth of the labour force exceeds the growth of capital (as it does in most developing 
countries).
The neoclassical response to the Harrod model was Robert Solow’s well-known growth model 
(Solow, 1956), which attempts to show that if the prices of factors of production are flexible, and 
labour and capital are substitutable, it is possible for countries to achieve equilibrium growth at 
the so-called ‘natural rate’, determined by the growth of the labour force and labour-saving tech-
nical progress. What determines labour force growth and technical progress is left unexplained. 
Because of the assumption of diminishing returns to capital, investment itself does not matter for 
long-run growth. The model also predicts that capital-scarce countries should grow faster than 
capital-rich countries, leading to a convergence of per capita incomes across the world, because 
the marginal product of capital should be higher in poor countries than in rich countries.
As we saw in Chapter 2, however, convergence of living standards across countries is not 
apparent, and this led in the 1980s to the development of the so-called ‘new’ growth theory or 
endogen­
ous growth theory, which relaxes the assumption of diminishing returns to capital by 
redefining capital to include improvements in human capital and new techniques of production 
through research and development (R&D) expenditure. In these ‘new’ models, convergence is 
only conditional, and investment matters for long-run growth because the marginal product of 
capital does not decline as more investment takes place.
We not only look at theory, but also empirics, and see how the neoclassical production func-
tion has been used to analyse the sources of growth in developing countries, and how ‘new’ 
growth theorists treat their models empirically.
An attempt is made to illustrate the contemporary relevance of the theories discussed. We 
shall, in fact, discover that the wheel has turned full circle, and that the most recent theories 
of endogenous growth rehabilitate many of the ideas of the old classical economists, particu-
larly Adam Smith’s emphasis on increasing returns associated with investment in manufacturing 
95
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
industry, and the general emphasis in both classical and Keynesian theory on the role of capital 
accumulation, and the embodiment of various forms of technical progress associated with it.
The chapter ends with a discussion of the topic of growth diagnostics and identifying binding 
constraints on growth.
Classical growth theory
The macroeconomic issues of the growth of output, and the distribution of income between 
wages and profits, were the major preoccupation of all the great classical economists, including 
Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus, David Ricardo and, last but not least, Karl Marx. This discussion 
starts with Adam Smith, because while Smith had a generally optimistic vision of the growth and 
development process, the later classical economists tended to have a more gloomy vision. This led 
historian Thomas Carlyle to describe economics as a ‘dismal science’ – not a sentiment, we hope, 
that will be shared by students reading this book.
Adam Smith
Born 1723, Kirkcaldy, Scotland. Died 1790. Professor of Moral Philosophy, 
University of Glasgow. Often described as the ‘father’ of modern eco-
nomics. Famous for two main books: The Theory of Moral Sentiments 
(1759) and An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations (1776). Strong advocate of free markets and free trade, but 
most important for recognizing the role that increasing returns play 
in the growth and development process, based on the principle of the 
division of labour or specialization – a characteristic of manufacturing 
industry in particular.
Adam Smith and increasing returns
One of Smith’s most important contributions was to introduce into economics the notion of 
increasing returns, based on the division of labour. He saw the division of labour (or gains from 
specialization) as the very basis of a social economy, otherwise everyone might as well be their 
own Robinson Crusoe producing everything they want for themselves. This notion of increas-
ing returns, based on the division of labour, lay at the heart of his optimistic vision of economic 
progress as a self-generating process, in contrast to later classical economists who believed that 
economies would end up in a stationary state owing to diminishing returns in agriculture and 
a falling rate of profit in industry. It was also in contrast to Marx, who believed that capitalism 
would collapse through its own ‘inner contradictions’, by which he meant competition between 
capitalists reducing the rate of profit and the alienation of workers.
Given the central importance of increasing returns, the essence of Smith’s model is a simple 
one, and many of the features he emphasizes will be a recurring theme in this and other chapters. 
The growth of output and living standards depends first and foremost on investment and capital 
96
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
accumulation. Investment, in turn, depends on savings out of the profits generated by industry 
and agriculture and the degree of labour specialization (or division of labour). The division of 
labour determines the level of labour productivity, but the division of labour is limited by the 
extent of the market. The extent of the market, however, depends partly on the division of labour 
as the determinant of per capita income. We have here a circular cumulative interactive process, 
although not without constraints, as we shall see later.
The notion of increasing returns may, on the surface, appear to be relatively trivial, but it is 
of profound significance for the way economic processes are viewed. It is not possible to under-
stand divisions in the world economy and so-called ‘centre–periphery’ models of growth and 
development (see Chapter 10) without distinguishing between activities that are subject to 
increasing returns on the one hand, and diminishing returns on the other. ‘Increasing returns’ 
means rising labour productivity and per capita income as output and employment expands, 
while ‘diminishing returns’ means falling labour productivity and per capita income and a limit to 
the employment of labour at the point where the marginal product of labour falls to the level of 
the subsistence wage. Beyond that point, there will be no more employment opportunities, and 
there will be disguised unemployment (see Chapters 3 and 5). Increasing returns are prevalent 
in most industrial activities, while diminishing returns characterize land-based activities such as 
agriculture and mining, because land is a fixed factor of production – and one of the few incon-
trovertible laws of economics is that if a variable factor is added to a fixed factor, its marginal 
product will eventually fall (the law of diminishing returns). Poor developing countries tend to 
specialize in diminishing returns activities, while rich developed countries tend to specialize in 
increasing returns activities, and this is one of the basic explanations of the rich country–poor 
country divide in the world economy. As we see later, it is the concept of increasing returns (or 
more precisely, non-diminishing returns to capital) that lies at the heart of the new endogenous 
growth theory.
Adam Smith (1776) gives three sources of the increasing returns to be derived from the divi-
sion of labour:
This great increase in the quantity of work, which, in consequence of the division of labour, the 
same number of people are capable of performing, is owing to three different circumstances; 
first to the increase of dexterity in every particular workman [what we now call learning by 
doing]; secondly, to the saving of time which is commonly lost in passing from one species of 
work to another; and lastly, to the invention of a great number of machines which facilitate 
and abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many.
That is, specialization provides greater scope for capital accumulation by enabling complex pro-
cesses to be broken up into simpler processes permitting the use of machinery. But the ability to 
specialize, or the division of labour, depends on the extent of the market. Smith uses the example 
of the production of pins. There is no point in installing sophisticated machinery to deal with the 
different processes of pin production if the market for pins is very small. It is only economical to 
use cost-saving machinery if the market is large. If the market is small, there would be surplus 
production. To quote Smith (1776) again:
when the market is very small, no person can have any encouragement to dedicate himself en-
tirely to one employment, for want of power to exchange all that surplus part of the produce 
of his own labour, which is over and above his own consumption, for such parts of the produce 
of other men’s labour as he has occasion for.
97
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
Smith (1776) recognized, however, that increasing returns based on the division of labour were 
much more a feature of industry than agriculture:
the nature of agriculture, indeed, does not admit of so many subdivisions of labour, nor of 
so complete a separation of one business from another, as manufactures. It is impossible to 
separate so entirely the business of the grazier from that of the corn farmer, as the trade of the 
carpenter is commonly separated from that of the smith.
This does not mean, of course, that agriculture is unimportant in the development process. On 
the contrary. Even though industry offers more scope for the division of labour, it would be dif-
ficult for industry to develop at all without an agricultural surplus, at least in the absence of 
imports. Smith recognized that an agricultural surplus is necessary to support an industrial popu-
lation, and labour released by improved productivity in agriculture can be used for the produc-
tion of non-agricultural goods. So, agriculture is certainly important for industrialization from 
the supply side. On the demand side, it is the agricultural surplus that gives rise to the demand 
for other goods, which can be purchased with the excess supply of agricultural goods. As Smith 
(1776) put it: ‘those, therefore, who have the command of more food than they themselves can 
consume, are always willing to exchange the surplus – for gratification of this other kind [manu-
factured goods]’. We have here a model of reciprocal demand between agriculture and industry, 
with industry demanding food from agriculture to feed workers, and agriculture exchanging its 
surplus for industrial goods. Balanced growth between agriculture and industry is essential for 
the growth and development process to proceed without impediment. Many later models of 
economic development reflect this insight (see Chapters 5 and 9). For a full exposition of Smith’s 
vision of the development process, in which aggregate demand and aggregate supply interact in a 
cumulative expansionary process, together with structural change, see Kim (2015).
The division of labour is limited by the size of the market. This is a central axiom of Smith’s 
model. The size of the market will be partly limited by restrictions on trade; hence Smith’s advo-
cacy of free trade and laissez-faire, internally and externally. Goods must be able to be exchanged 
freely between industry and agriculture. But demand for industrial goods can also come from 
abroad, and Smith (1776) recognized the role of exports in the development process:
without an extensive foreign market, [manufactures] could not well flourish, either in coun-
tries so moderately extensive as to afford but a narrow home market; or in countries where 
the communication between one province and another was so difficult as to render it impos-
sible for the goods of any particular place to enjoy the whole of that home market which the 
country could afford.
The subject of trade and growth, and models of export-led growth, is discussed in detail in Chapter 15.
Smith’s model of development is driven by capital accumulation generated by profits from 
industry; and the stimulus to invest, as in all classical models, comes from the rate of profit. If the 
rate of profit falls, the desire to invest diminishes. Smith was somewhat ambiguous about what 
happens to the rate of profit as development proceeds. On the one hand, he recognized that as 
the economy’s capital stock grows, the profit rate will tend to fall due to competition between 
capitalists and rising wages. On the other hand, new investment opportunities raise the rate of 
return. Thus, the rate of profit may rise or fall in the course of development depending on whether 
investment is in old or new technology. If there is any tendency towards a stationary state, in 
which the rate of profit falls to zero so that there is no further incentive to invest, it is a long way 
98
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
off in Smith’s model, in contrast to the models of Malthus, Ricardo and Marx, in which a fall in the 
rate of profit is seen as inevitable.
Before turning to these models, which focus on some of the more depressing features inherent 
in the development process, it needs to be said that Smith’s vision of development as a cumulative 
interactive process based on the division of labour and increasing returns in industry lay effect­
ively dormant until Allyn Young, an American economist, revived it in a profound but neglected 
article in 1928 entitled ‘Increasing Returns and Economic Progress’. As Young (1928) observed:
Adam Smith’s famous theorem [that the division of labour depends on the extent of the mar-
ket and the extent of the market depends on the division of labour] amounts to saying that 
the division of labour depends in large part on the division of labour. [But] this is more than 
mere tautology. It means that the counter forces which are continually defeating the forces 
which make for equilibrium are more pervasive and more deeply rooted than we commonly 
realise . . . Change becomes progressive and propagates itself in a cumulative way.
For Young, increasing returns are not simply confined to factors that raise productivity within 
individual industries, but are related to the output of all industries, which, he argued, must be 
viewed as an interrelated whole: what are now sometimes called macroeconomies of scale. For 
example, a larger market for product X may make it profitable to use more machinery in its pro-
duction, which reduces the cost of X and the cost of the machinery, which then makes the use of 
machinery more profitable in other industries and so on. Under certain conditions, change will 
become progressive and propagate itself in a cumulative way; the precise conditions being increas-
ing returns and an elastic demand for products so that as their relative price falls, proportionately 
more is bought. Take the example of steel and textiles, both of which are subject to increasing 
returns and are price elastic. As the supply of steel increases, its relative price (or exchange value) 
falls. If demand is price elastic, textile producers demand proportionately more steel, and offer 
proportionately more textiles in exchange. Textile production increases and its exchange value 
falls. If demand is price elastic, steel producers demand proportionately more textiles and so on. 
As Young said: ‘under these circumstances there are no limits to the process of expansion except 
the limits beyond which demand is not elastic and returns do not increase’.
The process described above could not occur with diminishing returns activities with an in­
elastic 
price demand, which characterizes most primary products. No wonder rapid development tends 
to be associated with the process of industrialization. It is true to say, however, that Young’s vision 
was also lost until the 1950s, when economists, such as Gunnar Myrdal, Albert Hirschman and 
Nicholas Kaldor, started to challenge equilibrium theory and develop non-equilibrium models 
of the growth and development process, in books such as Economic Theory and Underdeveloped 
Regions (Myrdal, 1957), Strategy of Economic Development (Hirschman, 1958), Strategic Factors in 
Economic Development (Kaldor, 1967) and Economics without Equilibrium (Kaldor, 1985). Kaldor 
used to joke that economics went wrong after Chapter 4, Book I of Smith’s Wealth of Nations, 
when Smith abandoned the assumption of increasing returns in favour of constant returns, and the 
foundations for neoclassical general equilibrium theory were laid. In contrast, it is now Smith and 
Young’s emphasis on increasing returns that lies at the heart of the new endogenous growth theory.
The classical pessimists
The prevailing classical view after Smith was very pessimistic about the process of economic 
development, focusing on the problems of rapid population growth and the effect exerted on 
99
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
the rate of profit in industry by rising food prices owing to diminishing returns and rising costs in 
agriculture. One of the foremost pessimists was Thomas Malthus, and it might be said that the 
ghost of Malthus still haunts many developing countries today with respect to his views on popu-
lation. But there are two strands to Malthus’s writing: his theory of population, and his focus on 
the importance for development of maintaining ‘effective demand’ – a concept later borrowed by 
Keynes, who acknowledged a debt to Malthus. In fact, Malthus was the only classical economist 
to emphasize the importance of demand for the determination of output – all others adhered 
to Say’s law: that supply creates its own demand, so that the level and growth of output are a 
function of the supply of physical inputs alone. For Malthus, effective demand must grow in line 
with productive potential if profitability as the stimulus to investment is to be maintained, but 
there is nothing to guarantee this. Malthus focused on the savings of landlords and the possible 
imbalance between the supply of saving and the planned investment of capitalists, which might 
impede development. If landlord saving exceeded the amount that capitalists wished to borrow, 
Malthus suggested the taxation of landlords as one solution.
Malthus is best known, however, for An Essay on the Principle of Population ([1798]1983), in 
which he claimed that there is a ‘constant tendency in all animated life to increase beyond the 
nourishment prepared for it’. According to Malthus, ‘population goes on doubling itself every 
twenty five years, or increases in a geometrical ratio’, whereas ‘it may be fairly said … that the 
means of subsistence increase in an arithmetical ratio’. Taking the world as a whole, therefore, 
Malthus ([1798]1983) concluded:
the human species would increase (if unchecked) as the numbers 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 
and subsistence as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. [This would mean that] in two centuries the population 
would be to the means of subsistence as 256 to 9; in three centuries as 4096 to 13, and in two 
thousand years the difference would be incalculable.
If food production only grows at an arithmetic rate, this implies, of course, diminishing returns 
to agriculture. The imbalance between population growth and growth of the food supply would 
lead to the per capita income of countries oscillating around the subsistence level, or being caught 
in what is now sometimes called a low-level equilibrium trap (see Chapter 11). Any increases in 
per capita income brought about by technical progress lead to more births, which then reduce 
Thomas Malthus
Born 1766, Surrey, England. Died 1834. Professor of History and Political 
Economy at the East India Company College. Famous for An Essay on 
the Principle of Population (1798) predicting that population growth will 
outstrip food supply because of diminishing returns in agriculture. Some 
communities in developing countries still have Malthusian character-
istics, and some ‘environmentalists’ predict a Malthusian world in the 
future.
100
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
per capita income back to subsistence level. Early development models of the ‘big push’ were 
designed to lift economies from this trap. Malthus recognized certain checks to the process, 
which he divided into ‘preventative’ and ‘positive’ checks, some of which still operate today in cer-
tain countries. Preventive checks include sexual abstinence or the use of contraception, although 
Malthus was opposed to the latter. Where preventive checks are weak, positive checks take over 
in the form of pestilence, disease and famine. Malthus’s solution to population growth was the 
‘postponement of marriage in a viceless society’.
While Malthusian economics may still have relevance in certain parts of Africa and Asia, 
Malthus’s gloomy prognostications have not materialized for the world as a whole, because pre-
ventive checks have become stronger and food production has grown not at an arithmetic rate 
but at a rate faster than the growth of population (see Chapter 5). Technical progress in agricul-
ture has offset diminishing returns. The underestimation of technical progress in agriculture has 
confounded all the classical pessimists.
David Ricardo was another of the great classical pessimists. In 1817 he published his Principles 
of Political Economy and Taxation (Ricardo, [1817]1992), in which he predicted that capitalist 
economies would end up in a stationary state, with no growth, also owing to diminishing returns 
in agriculture. In Ricardo’s model, like Smith’s, growth and development are a function of cap­
ital accumulation, and capital accumulation depends on reinvested profits. However, profits are 
squeezed between subsistence wages and the payment of rent to landlords, which increases as the 
price of food rises owing to diminishing returns to land and rising marginal costs. Ricardo thought 
of the economy as ‘one big farm’ in which food (or corn) and manufactures are consumed in fixed 
proportions, so that corn can be used as the unit of account. Figure 4.1 illustrates the model.
With the employment of L amount of labour, the total output is 0RZL. Rent is determined by 
the difference between the average and marginal product of labour working on the land and is 
given by the area PRZY. Wages are equal to 0WXL, and profit is the difference between rent and 
wages, equal to WPYX. As output increases and the marginal product of labour falls to the sub-
sistence wage (L1), profits disappear. In equilibrium, the rate of profit in agriculture must equal 
the rate of profit in industry. As the profit rate in agriculture falls, capital will shift to industry, 
causing the rate of profit to decline there. Profits are also squeezed because wages rise in terms of 
food. But for Ricardo, unlike Malthus, there was no problem of effective demand. Ricardo saw no 
limit to the amount of capital that could be employed because he accepted Say’s law that sup-
ply creates its own demand. The villain of the piece is wages. Ricardo ([1817]1992) wrote: ‘there 
is no limit to demand – no limit to the employment of capital while it yields any profit, and that 
Figure 4.1  Ricardo’s model of the economy
Corn
R
Z
Y
X
L
L1
P
W
0
Average product 
Subsistence wage
Marginal product
Labour
Rent
Profits
Wages
101
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
however abundant capital may become, there is no other adequate reason for a fall in profit but 
a rise in wages’. As profits fall to zero, capital accumulation ceases, heralding the stationary state. 
As Ricardo ([1817]1992) put it:
a real rise of wages is necessarily followed by a real fall in profits, and, therefore, when the land 
of a country is brought to the highest state of cultivation, when more labour employed upon it 
will not yield in return more food than what is necessary to support the labourer so employed, 
that country has come to the limit of its increase both of capital and population.
As discussed in Chapter 5, Arthur Lewis’s well-known development model, ‘economic develop-
ment with unlimited supplies of labour’, is a classical Ricardian model, but wages are assumed to 
stay the same until disguised unemployment on the land is absorbed.
Given the central importance of capital accumulation in Ricardo’s vision of economic progress, 
anything that reduces capital accumulation (including rises in wages) will slow economic growth. 
Ricardo was thus opposed to all forms of taxes, levies and tariffs on inputs into the productive 
system, including tariffs on imported food. Indeed, he believed that the importation of cheap 
food might delay the predicted stationary state indefinitely by holding down wages measured in 
terms of food:
a country could go on for an indefinite time increasing its wealth and population, for the only 
obstacle to this increase would be the scarcity, and consequent high value, of food and other 
raw produce. Let these be supplied from abroad in exchange for manufactured goods, and it is 
difficult to say where the limit is at which you would cease to accumulate wealth and to derive 
profits from its employment (Ricardo [1817]1992).
It was for this reason that Ricardo campaigned for the abolition of the Corn Laws in Britain in the 
nineteenth century. These laws were eventually repealed in 1846 – to the benefit of industrialists 
but the detriment of domestic farmers. In developing countries today, governments often attempt 
to keep the price of agricultural goods artificially low in order to keep wages low (measured in 
terms of food). Doing this, however, raises another problem of reducing the incentive of farmers 
to produce. Determining the equilibrium terms of trade between agriculture and industry, which 
maximizes the output growth of both sectors, is a difficult empirical issue (see Chapter 5).
David Ricardo
Born 1772, London, England. Died 1823. Led a colourful life as politician, 
industrialist, speculator and economist. Principles of Political Economy 
and Taxation (1817) made him the foremost classical economist of 
the first half of the nineteenth century. Predicted that economies will 
end up in a stationary state through diminishing returns in agriculture 
reducing the rate of profit in industry. Campaigned for the repeal of 
the Corn Laws in England to make food cheaper. Most famous for his 
formulation of the doctrine of comparative advantage; one of the few 
non-trivial theorems in economics.
102
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Finally, we turn to Karl Marx, famous for Das Kapital ([1867]1967), and his prediction of the 
collapse of capitalism. All members of the classical school agreed that the rate of profit on capital 
would fall as the economy grew, but they differed as to the reason for the fall. Adam Smith saw 
the decline in profits as the result of competition among capitalists. Ricardo saw the fall as the 
result of diminishing returns to land, and profits being squeezed between rent and wages, lead-
ing to a stationary state. For Marx, the economy does not grow forever, but the end comes not 
from a stationary state but from ‘crises’ associated with overproduction and social upheaval. But 
Marx’s model bears many similarities to the other classical economists. The capitalist surplus is 
the source of capital accumulation and the principal mainspring of growth. Population growth 
responds to wages in Malthusian fashion, keeping wages down, and the rate of profit has a long-
run tendency to fall.
Let us briefly consider Marx’s model and his prediction of crisis. Gross output consists of three 
elements:
•
• Variable capital or the wage bill (v)
•
• Constant capital (c), that is, plant and machinery and the raw materials used in production
•
• Surplus value or profit (s).
The wages of labour are determined by the minimum subsistence level (what Marx called the cost 
of reproducing the working class), and surplus value (which only labour can create) is the differ-
ence between output per worker and the minimum wage per worker. The rate of surplus value, or 
what Marx called the ‘degree of exploitation’, is given by s/v. The rate of profit is given by the ratio 
of surplus value to total capital; that is:
s/(v 1 c) 5 (s/v)/(1 1 [c/v])
(4.1)
where the ratio of constant capital to variable capital (c/v) is defined as the organic composition 
of capital. As techniques of production become more capital intensive, the organic composition 
rises through time, and as it does so, the rate of profit falls unless surplus value rises. While there 
is no limit to the rise in c/v, however, there is a limit to s/v. Marx foresaw no major problem as 
long as surplus labour exists to keep wages down, but he predicted that as capital accumulation 
continues, the reserve army of labour, as he called it, would disappear, driving wages up and 
profits down. The capitalist’s response is then either to attempt to keep wages down, leading to 
the immiserization of workers and social conflict, or to substitute more capital for labour, which 
would worsen the problem by raising c/v.
For Marx ([1867]1967), the desire and necessity to invest are inherent in the psychological 
makeup of the capitalist: ‘To accumulate, is to conquer the world of social wealth, to increase the 
mass of human beings exploited by him, and then to extend both the direct and indirect sway 
of the capitalist.’ Thus the capitalist’s motto is ‘Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the 
Prophets.’ But as capital is substituted for labour, there is another problem: labour cannot con-
sume all the goods produced, and a realization crisis is caused by the failure of effective demand. 
Capitalism eventually collapses through its own ‘inner contradictions’, and power passes to the 
working classes because fewer and fewer people benefit from capitalism. Capitalism is replaced 
by socialism, whereby workers own the means of production, distribution and exchange, and ulti-
mately the state withers away.
Marx’s analysis contains valuable insights into the functioning of capitalism, but his predic-
tions, like those of his predecessors, have not materialized. There seem to be two basic reasons 
for this. The first is that there is a confusion in Marx’s work between money wages and real 
wages. A rise in money wages as surplus labour disappears does not necessarily mean a rise in 
103
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
real wages; but in any case, any rise in real wages could be offset by a rise in labour productiv-
ity, leaving the rate of profit unchanged. The second and related reason is that just as the other 
classical economists underestimated the rate of technical progress in agriculture as an offset to 
diminishing returns, so Marx underestimated the effect of technical progress in industry on the 
productivity of labour. It can be seen from equation (4.1) that even if c/v is rising, the rate of 
profit can remain unchanged if technical progress exceeds the rate of wage growth by the same 
amount. Technical progress also means there is no necessary clash between real wages and the 
rate of profit. Both can rise.
For nearly 60 years after Marx’s death in 1883, growth and development theory lay effectively 
dormant, as economics came to be dominated by static neoclassical value theory under the influ-
ence of Alfred Marshall’s Principles of Economics (1890). Marshall treated growth and development 
as more or less a ‘natural’ phenomenon; an evolutionary process akin to biological developments 
in the natural world. Modern growth theory started with the classic article by British economist 
Roy Harrod, ‘An Essay in Dynamic Theory’ (1939), and American economist Evsey Domar arrived 
at Harrod’s result independently in 1947 (Domar, 1947), which led to the development of what 
is now called the Harrod–Domar growth model. The model has played a major part in thinking 
about development issues since the Second World War, and is still widely used in development 
planning (see Chapter 9).
The Harrod–Domar growth model
Harrod’s original model is a dynamic extension of Keynes’ static equilibrium analysis. In Keynes’ 
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936), the condition for income and out-
put to be in equilibrium (in the closed economy) is that plans to invest equal plans to save (or 
injections into the circular flow of income should equal leakages). The question Harrod asked 
is: If changes in income induce investment, what must be the rate of growth of income for plans 
to invest to equal plans to save in order to ensure a moving equilibrium in a growing economy 
through time? Moreover, is there any guarantee that this required rate of growth will prevail? If 
not, what will happen? In static Keynesian theory, if equilibrium between saving and investment 
is disturbed, the economy corrects itself and a new equilibrium is achieved via the multiplier 
 
Karl Marx
Born 1818, Trier, Germany. Died 1883. Settled in England in 1848 and 
supported by Friedrich Engels. Das Kapital (vol. 1, 1867, and three fur-
ther volumes published posthumously), his major work, has inspired 
generations of left-wing thinkers in their critiques of the inequalities 
of capitalism. His prediction that capitalism would collapse through a 
decline in the rate of profit and the immiserization of workers leading 
to social revolution has not materialized, because in a growing econ-
omy with technical progress, there is no clash between real wages and 
the rate of profit.
104
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
process. If growth equilibrium is disturbed, will it be self-correcting or self-aggravating? Moreover, 
will this equilibrium rate be equal to the maximum rate of growth that the economy is able to 
sustain, given the rate of growth of productive capacity? If not, what will happen? These are fun-
damental questions for the understanding of the growth performance of any country, be it devel-
oped or underdeveloped, and Harrod’s place in the history of economic thought was guaranteed 
by the insight and simplicity with which he answered them.
To consider the questions posed, Harrod distinguished three different growth rates: what he 
called the actual growth rate (g), the warranted growth rate (gw) and the natural growth rate 
(gn). The actual growth rate is defined as:
g 5 s/c
(4.2)
where s is the ratio of savings to national income (S/Y) and c is the actual incremental capital–
output ratio, that is, the ratio of extra capital accumulation or investment to the flow of output 
(DK/DY 5 I/DY). This expression for the actual growth rate (g 5 s/c) is, by definition, true since it 
expresses the accounting identity that savings equals investment. We can see this if we substitute 
the expressions for s and c into equation (4.2) – that is, s/c 5 (S/Y)/(I/DY) 5 DY/Y, given S 5 I, 
where DY/Y measures the growth of output.
We need more than a definitional equation, however, to know whether the actual growth rate 
will provide the basis for steady advance in the future, in the sense that it keeps plans to invest 
and plans to save in line with one another at full employment. This is where the concepts of the 
warranted rate of growth and the natural rate of growth become important.
Harrod (1939) defined the warranted rate of growth as:
that rate of growth which, if it occurs, will leave all parties satisfied that they have produced 
neither more nor less than the right amount. Or, to state matters otherwise, it will put them 
into a frame of mind which will cause them to give such orders as will maintain the same rate 
of growth.
In other words, the warranted growth rate is the rate that induces just enough investment to 
match planned saving and therefore keeps capital fully employed (that is, there is no undercap­
acity or overcapacity), so that manufacturers are willing to carry on investment in the future at 
the same rate as in the past. How is this rate determined? Plans to save at any point in time are 
given by the Keynesian savings function:
S 5 sY
(4.3)
where s is the propensity to save. This gives the potential supply of investment goods. The demand 
for investment is given by the acceleration principle (or what Harrod calls ‘the relation’), where 
cr is the accelerator coefficient measured as the required amount of extra capital or investment to 
produce a unit flow of output at a given rate of interest, determined by technological conditions. 
Thus:
cr 5 DKr/DY 5 I/DY
(4.4)
The demand for investment, given by the accelerator principle, is then:
I 5 crDY
(4.5)
For planned saving to equal planned investment, therefore, we have:
sY 5 crDY
(4.6)
105
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
and the required rate of growth for a moving equilibrium through time is:
DY/Y 5 s/cr 5 gw
(4.7)
This is the warranted rate of growth, gw. For dynamic equilibrium, output must grow at this rate. 
At this rate, expenditure on consumption goods will equal the production of consumption goods, 
and this is the only rate at which entrepreneurs will be satisfied with what they are doing, so that 
they do not revise their investment plans.
Now, suppose there is a departure from this equilibrium rate. What happens? The condition 
for equilibrium is that g 5 gw or, from equations (4.2) and (4.7), that gc 5 gwcr. First, suppose that the 
actual growth rate exceeds the warranted rate. It is easily seen that if g . gw  , then c , cr  , which means 
that actual investment falls below the level required to meet the increase in output. There will be 
a shortage of equipment, a depletion of stocks and an incentive to invest more. The actual growth 
rate will then depart even further from the warranted rate. Conversely, if the actual growth rate 
is less than the warranted rate, g , gw  , then c . cr  , and there will be a surplus of capital goods and 
investment will be discouraged, causing the actual growth rate to fall even further below the 
equilibrium rate. Thus, as Harrod points out, we have in the dynamic field a condition opposite 
to that in the static field. A departure from equilibrium, instead of being self-righting, will be self-
aggravating. This is the short-term trade cycle problem in Harrod’s growth model.
Roy Harrod
Born 1900, Norfolk, England. Died 1978. Spent all his academic career 
in Christ Church College, Oxford. One of Keynes’ inner circle; in the late 
1930s, made static Keynesian theory dynamic, thus pioneering modern 
growth theory. One of the most original economists of the twentieth 
century; made important contributions to the theory of the firm, inter­
national economics and economic dynamics. Authored a book on induc-
tive logic as well as the first biography of Keynes.
American economist Evsey Domar, working independently of Harrod, arrived at Harrod’s 
central conclusion, although by a slightly different route. Domar recognized that investment is 
a double-edged sword: it both increases demand via the multiplier, and increases supply via its 
effect on expanding capacity. The question Domar asked, therefore, was: What rate of growth of 
investment must prevail in order for supply to grow in line with demand (at full employment)? 
The crucial rate of growth of investment can be derived in the following way. A change in the level 
of investment increases demand by:
DYd 5 DI/s
(4.8)
and investment itself increases supply by:
DYs 5 Is
(4.9)
106
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
where s is the productivity of capital or the flow of output per unit of investment (DY/I). For 
DYd 5 DYs, we must have:
DI/s 5 Is
(4.10)
or:
DI/I 5 ss
(4.11)
In other words, investment must grow at a rate equal to the product of the savings ratio and the 
productivity of capital. With a constant savings–investment ratio, this also implies output growth 
at the rate ss. If s 5 1/cr (at full employment), then the Harrod–Domar result for equilibrium 
growth is the same.
But even if growth proceeds at the rate required for full utilization of the capital stock and a 
moving equilibrium through time, this still does not guarantee the full employment of labour, 
which depends on the natural rate of growth. The natural growth rate is derived from the iden-
tity Y* 5 L*(Y/L)*, where Y* is the potential level of output, L* is the potential labour force and 
(Y/L)* is the potential level of labour productivity. Taking rates of change of the variables gives 
 
y* 5 l 1 q
.. The natural rate of growth (gn) is therefore made up of two components: the growth 
of the potential labour force (l) and the growth of potential labour productivity (q
.) (what Harrod 
called the rate of growth of the labour force in efficiency units) – both exogenously determined 
in the Harrod model.1 The natural rate of growth plays an important role in Harrod’s growth 
model in two ways. First, it defines the rate of growth of productive capacity or the long-run full 
employment equilibrium growth rate. Second, it sets the upper limit to the actual growth rate, 
which brings cumulative expansion in the Harrod (trade cycle) model to a sticky end. If g . gw, g 
can continue to diverge from gw only until it hits gn, when all available labour has been completely 
absorbed: g cannot be greater than gn in the long run. The long-run question for an economy, 
then, is the relation between gw and gn; that is, the relation between the growth of capital and the 
growth of the labour force (measured in efficiency units). With fixed coefficients of production, 
the full employment of labour clearly requires g 5 gn. The full employment of labour and capital 
requires:
g 5 gw 5 gn
(4.12)
a state of affairs that the well-known Cambridge economist Joan Robinson once called a ‘golden 
age’ to emphasize its mythical nature, because there is nothing in the Harrod model that would 
automatically generate this happy coincidence.
Let us now consider what happens if the warranted growth rate diverges from the natural rate. 
If gw . gn, there will be a chronic tendency towards depression because the actual rate of growth 
will never be sufficient to stimulate investment demand to match the amount of saving at full 
employment equilibrium. There is too much capital and too much saving. This was the worry that 
economists had in the 1930s, particularly when it was predicted that the size of the population 
would fall in developed countries because the net reproduction rate had fallen below one (that 
is, females were not replacing themselves). If gw , gn, there will be a tendency towards demand 
inflation because there will be a tendency for the actual rate of growth to exceed that necessary 
to induce investment to match saving. Inflationary pressure, however, will be accompanied by 
growing unemployment of the structural variety, because the growth of capital falls short of the 
growth of the effective labour force and there is no change in the techniques of production.
Where do developing countries fit into this picture? In most developing countries, the nat­
ural growth rate exceeds the warranted rate. If the population growth is, say, 2% and labour 
107
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
productivity is growing at 3%, this gives a rate of growth of the labour force in efficiency units 
 
of 5%. If the net savings ratio is, say, 9% and the required incremental capital–output ratio is 3, 
this gives a warranted growth rate of 3%. This has two main consequences. First, it means that 
the effective labour force is growing faster than capital accumulation, which is part of the explan­
ation for growing unemployment in developing countries. Second, it implies plans to invest 
greater than plans to save, and therefore inflationary pressure. If gn 5 5% and cr 5 3, there will be 
profitable investment opportunities for 15% saving, whereas actual saving is only 9%.
The simultaneous existence of inflation and high unemployment in developing countries is 
therefore not a paradox. It can easily be explained within the framework and assumptions of the 
Harrod growth model, as can a great deal of development policy. Given the inequality gn ≠ gw, or 
l 1 q
. ≠ s/cr, it can be seen that there are basically four ways in which gn and gw might be reconciled:
1.	 If the problem is gn . gw, the rate of growth of the labour force could be reduced. Measures to 
control population growth can be justified on these grounds, as a contribution to solving the 
problem of structural unemployment.
2.	 A reduction in the rate of growth of labour productivity would help, but this would reduce the 
growth of living standards of those in work. There is a clash here between employment and 
efficiency.
3.	 A rise in the savings ratio could narrow the gap. This is at the heart of monetary and fiscal 
 
reform in developing countries (see Chapter 13).
4.	 The natural and warranted growth rates might be brought into line by a reduction in the 
 
required capital–output ratio through the use of more labour-intensive techniques.
There is an active debate in developing countries over the appropriate choice of techniques, and 
whether developing countries could move towards the use of more labour-intensive techniques 
without impairing output and sacrificing saving (see Chapter 6). All these adjustment mech­
anisms are illustrated in Figure 4.2.
Growth is measured on the vertical axis, and the investment and savings ratios on the hori-
zontal axis. Growth and the investment ratio are related through cr – the required incremental 
­
capital–output ratio. The savings ratio is independent of the growth rate. Figure 4.2 depicts a 
situation in which the natural growth rate (gn) exceeds the warranted growth rate (gw). To equal-
ize gn and gw, we can bring down gn to gw by measures to curb labour force growth; we can shift 
rightwards the S/Y curve through monetary and fiscal policies (and also by foreign borrowing) to 
raise gw to gn, or we can pivot the I/Y curve inwards by reducing cr through the use of more labour-
intensive techniques of production.
Figure 4.2  Adjustment of gw and gn
g
I/Y, S/Y
I/Y
S/Y
1/cr
gn
gw
0
108
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The Harrod framework is not only useful for understanding some of the development difficul-
ties of developing countries, it is also useful for planning purposes. If a country sets a target rate 
of growth of, say, 5% per annum and the required capital–output ratio is 3, it knows it must save 
and invest 15% of GDP if the target growth rate is to be achieved. If domestic saving is less than 
15% of GDP, there is an investment–savings gap to fill, which might be done by foreign borrowing 
(see Chapter 14).
At a theoretical level, there has been a great deal of discussion in the literature of whether auto-
matic adjustment mechanisms might not come into play to reconcile the divergence between gn 
and gw. In the Harrod model, the parameters and variables that make up the model, l, q
., s and cr, 
are all independently determined. Harrod himself recognized that, in the long run the savings ratio 
may not be fixed, but will adjust. Specifically, in periods of recession, savings may fall, and in peri-
ods of demand inflation, savings may rise. One way this may come about is through a change in 
the functional distribution of income between wages and profits. This is a possible mechanism of 
adjustment emphasized by the post-Keynesian economists of Cambridge, England, represented 
by Joan Robinson, Nicholas Kaldor, Richard Kahn, Luigi Pasinetti and others. If gw . gn, and there 
is a tendency towards depression, this will tend to reduce the share of profits in national income 
and increase the share of wages, so that if the propensity to save out of profits is higher than the 
propensity to save out of wages, this change in the distribution of income will lower the overall 
savings ratio and reduce gw towards gn. There is a limit, however, to which the share of profits can 
fall, given by the minimum rate of profit acceptable to entrepreneurs. Likewise, if gw , gn, and 
there is a tendency towards demand inflation, the share of profits in national income will tend to 
rise, increasing the overall savings ratio and raising gw towards gn. There is also a limit, however, to 
the rise in the profit share, set by the degree to which workers are willing to see their real wages 
reduced – what Joan Robinson called ‘the inflation barrier’ (see Chapter 13).
At the same time (the 1950s), in contrast to the Cambridge, England school of post-Keynesian 
economists, a formidable group of economists in Cambridge, Massachusetts, represented by 
Robert Solow, Paul Samuelson, Franco Modigliani and others, developed the so-called neoclas-
sical model of growth as an attack on Harrod and the post-Keynesian school. They pointed out 
that the gloomy conclusions of Harrod concerning the possibility of achieving steady growth with 
full employment assume fixed coefficients of production, and that if the capital-labour ratio is 
allowed to vary, there is the possibility of equilibrium growth at the natural rate. In other words, if 
capital grows faster than labour (gw . gn), economies will move smoothly via the price mechanism 
to more capital-intensive techniques, and growth in the long run will proceed at the exogenously 
given natural rate. Conversely, if labour grows faster than capital (gn . gw), the wage rate will fall 
relative to the price of capital, economies will adopt more labour-intensive techniques, and again 
growth will proceed at the natural rate.
One central feature of this neoclassical model, which has come under sustained attack in 
recent years from new growth theory, is that investment does not matter for long-run growth. 
Any increase in the savings or investment ratio is offset by an increase in the capital–output ratio, 
because of diminishing returns to capital, leaving the long-run growth rate (at the natural rate) 
unchanged. The argument depends, however, on the productivity of capital falling (or cr rising) 
as the capital–labour ratio rises. This is disputed by the new growth theorists. If there are mech­
anisms to prevent the productivity of capital from falling as investment increases, then investment 
does matter for long-run growth and growth is endogenous in this sense. But before we turn to new 
growth theory and the important new studies of the macrodeterminants of growth, we need to 
consider the assumptions and predictions of neoclassical growth theory, and see how it has been 
used empirically for understanding the sources of growth in developed and developing countries.
109
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
Neoclassical growth theory
There are three basic propositions of neoclassical growth theory:
1.	 In the long-run steady state, the growth of output is determined by the rate of growth of the 
labour force in efficiency units, that is, by the rate of growth of the labour force plus the rate of 
growth of labour productivity (exogenously given as in Harrod’s natural rate of growth), and is 
independent of the ratio of saving and investment to GDP. This is so because a higher savings 
or investment ratio is offset by a higher capital–output ratio or lower productivity of capital, 
because of the neoclassical assumption of diminishing returns to capital.
2.	 The level of per capita income (PCY), however, does depend on the ratio of saving and invest-
ment to GDP. The level of PCY varies positively with the savings–investment ratio and nega-
tively with the rate of growth of the population.
3.	 If there is an inverse relation across countries between the capital–labour ratio and the prod­
uctivity of capital, and tastes (i.e. savings behaviour) and technology are the same across 
­
countries, poor countries with a small amount of capital per head should grow faster than rich 
countries with a lot of capital per head, leading to the convergence of per capita incomes and 
living standards across the world.
Let us now consider how these fundamental propositions are arrived at. The basic neoclassical 
growth model was first developed independently by Robert Solow and Trevor Swan in 1956 and 
has been very influential in the analysis of growth ever since – particularly the use of the aggre-
gate production function, as we shall see. The model is based on three key assumptions (ignoring 
technical progress for the moment):
1.	 The labour force grows at a constant exogenous rate, l.
2.	 Output is a function of capital and labour: Y 5 F (K, L); the production function relating out-
put to inputs exhibits constant returns to scale, diminishing returns to individual factors of 
production, and has a unitary elasticity of substitution between factors (see later).
3.	 All saving is invested: S 5 I 5 sY; there is no independent investment function.
What the basic neoclassical growth model is designed to show is that an economy will tend 
towards a long-run equilibrium capital–labour ratio (k*) at which output (or income) per head 
(q*) is also in equilibrium, so that output, capital and labour all grow at the same rate, l. The model 
therefore predicts long-run growth equilibrium at the natural rate.
Robert Solow
Born 1924, New York City, USA. Spent all his academic career at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Famous for his pioneering 
work on the theory of economic growth and technical change with 
his 1956 paper ‘A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth’, 
which challenged the rigid Harrod model of long-run disequilibrium 
growth. Also made important contributions to mathematical eco-
nomics, capital theory and macroeconomics. Received the Nobel Prize 
for Economics, 1987.
110
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The most commonly used neoclassical production function with constant returns to scale is 
the so-called Cobb–Douglas production function:
Y 5 bKaL12a
(4.13)
where a is the elasticity of output with respect to capital, 12a is the elasticity of output with 
respect to labour, and a 1 (1 2 a) 5 1, that is, a 1% increase in K and L will lead to a 1% increase 
in Y, which is what is meant by output exhibiting constant returns to scale.
Equation (4.13) can also be written in ‘labour-intensive’ form by dividing both sides of the 
equation by L to give output per head as a function of capital per head:
Y
L  5  bKaL12a
L
  5 baK
L b
a

(4.14)
or, for short:
q 5 b (k)a
(4.15)
This is the ‘labour-intensive’ form of the neoclassical production function, and can be drawn as 
in Figure 4.3. The diminishing slope of the function represents the diminishing marginal product 
of capital.
Now impose a ray from the origin along which the rate of growth of capital is equal to the rate 
of growth of labour, so that the capital–labour ratio is constant. This is given by:
q 5 (l/s)k
(4.16)2
where s is the savings ratio. This straight line from the origin with slope l/s shows the level of q that 
will keep capital per head constant, and the level of k that will keep output per head constant – given 
the rate of growth of the labour force, l. Superimposing equation (4.16) on Figure 4.3 gives Figure 4.4.
The slope of the ray from the origin to any point on the production function determines the 
capital–output ratio at that point. It is clear from Figure 4.4 that only where these two lines cross 
is an equilibrium capital–labour ratio (k*) and output per head (q*) defined. To the left of k* (at 
k1), where q . (l/s)k, q is greater than necessary to maintain k constant; that is, there is too much 
saving and capital accumulation relative to the growth of the labour force, and steady growth 
requires more capital-intensive techniques. There will be a movement from k1 towards k*. The 
capital–output ratio adjusts to bring the rate of growth of capital and labour (or the warranted 
and natural growth rates) into line. Similarly, to the right of k* (at k2), where q , (l/s)k, q is less 
q
f (k)
0
k
Figure 4.3  The ‘labour-intensive’ form of the neoclassical production function
111
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
than necessary to maintain k constant; there is too little saving and capital accumulation to keep 
pace with the rate of growth of the labour force, and steady growth requires more labour-inten-
sive techniques. There will be a movement from k2 towards k*. Again, the capital–output ratio 
adjusts if there is a spectrum of techniques to choose from.
When k reaches an equilibrium, q also reaches an equilibrium, so output must be growing as 
fast as labour. Thus, output, labour and capital must all be growing at the same rate, l, the natural 
rate of growth, with the capital–output ratio constant. This is the neoclassical story.
We can now see what happens if there is an increase in the ratio of savings and investment 
to national income (s). If s rises, this lowers the slope of the l/s line in Figure 4.4, which increases 
the equilibrium level of per capita income and the capital–labour ratio, but leaves the equilibrium 
growth rate unchanged. This demonstrates formally the first two basic propositions of neoclassic­
al 
growth theory. The reason a higher savings or investment ratio does not affect the long-run 
 
equilibrium growth rate is that a higher savings–investment ratio is ultimately offset by a higher 
capital–output ratio. The capital–output ratio adjusts ‘passively’ to keep the growth of capital in 
line with the growth of the labour force.
None of these conclusions is altered if technical progress is introduced into the model. If 
technical progress augments the productivity of labour only (so-called Harrod neutral techni-
cal progress, which leaves the capital–output ratio unchanged), the effective labour force now 
grows at the rate l 1 q
., where q
. is the rate of growth of labour productivity. Equilibrium is now 
defined in terms of output per effective worker and capital per effective worker. Equilibrium 
capital per worker requires DK/K 5 l 1 q
., and equilibrium output per effective worker requires 
 
DY/Y5 l 1q
., so that capital per head and output per head grow at the same rate q
.; that is, by the 
rate of Harrod neutral technical progress:3
DY/Y 2l 5 DK/K 2l 5 q
.
(4.17)
This is, of course, consistent with what we observe in the real world – output and capital grow 
faster than the rate of growth of the labour force. But a rise in the ratio of savings and investment 
 
to GDP still has no effect on the equilibrium growth of output, unless, of course, a higher level 
of investment raises the rate of growth of labour-augmenting technical progress, but this is 
ruled out by assumption in the neoclassical model, because technical progress is assumed to be 
 
exogenously determined.
Figure 4.4  Equilibrium capital–labour ratio and output per head
q
k
k*
q*
k2
k1
f(k)
 
(l/s)k
l/s
0
112
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
It now only remains to demonstrate the third basic proposition of neoclassical growth theory: 
that poor countries should grow faster than rich countries, leading to the convergence of per cap-
ita incomes because poor countries with a low ratio of capital to labour will have a higher prod­
uctivity of capital (or lower capital–output ratio). The capital–output ratio may be written as:
K
Y  5   K
L .  L
Y
(4.18)
Given diminishing returns to capital (so that Y/L does not rise in the same proportion as K/L), it 
can be seen that a higher K/L ratio will be associated with a higher K/Y ratio. This means that if the 
ratio of savings and investment to GDP is the same across countries, capital-rich countries should 
grow slower than capital-poor countries. Note, however, that if there are not diminishing returns 
to capital, but, say, constant returns to capital, a higher capital–labour ratio will be exactly offset 
by a higher output–labour ratio, and the capital–output ratio will not be higher in capital-rich 
countries than in capital-poor countries, so convergence is not to be expected. If there are not 
diminishing returns to capital, this also means that the capital–output ratio will not rise as more 
investment takes place, and therefore the ratio of saving and investment to GDP does mat-
ter for growth. In this sense, growth is endogenously determined; it is not simply exogenously 
determined by the rate of growth of the labour force and technical progress. This is the starting 
point for the new (endogenous) growth theory, which seeks to explain why, in practice, living 
standards in the world economy have not converged (see Chapter 2), contrary to the predictions 
of neoclassical theory. The explanation offered by the new growth theory is that there are forces at 
work that prevent the marginal product of capital from falling (and the capital–output ratio from 
rising) as more investment takes place as countries get richer. Before turning to the new growth 
theory, however, let us first consider how the neoclassical production function can be used to 
analyse the sources of growth. This requires us to look more closely at the concept of the produc-
tion function and the properties of the Cobb–Douglas production function, which is still widely 
used in the analysis of growth in developed and developing countries.
The production function approach to the analysis of growth
We have already seen that there are several ways in which the growth of income or output of a 
country may be expressed, but frequently they consist of identities that tell us very little about the 
causes or sources of growth. For example, in the Harrod–Domar model, growth can be expressed 
as the product of the ratio of investment to GDP and the productivity of investment, so that, 
by definition, slow growth is the product of a low investment ratio and/or a low productivity of 
capital. By itself, however, this does not further much our understanding of the growth process in 
different countries. Why do some countries save and invest more than others, and why does the 
productivity of capital differ? Likewise, we have seen that the growth of output can be expressed 
as the sum of the rate of growth of the labour force and the rate of growth of labour productiv-
ity. By definition, slow growth is attributable to a slow rate of growth of the labour force and/
or a slow rate of growth of labour productivity. Again, why does growth in labour productivity 
differ between countries? Is it because of differences in capital accumulation, or differences in 
technical progress, broadly defined to include such factors as improvements in the quality of 
labour, improvements in the quality of capital, economies of scale, advances in knowledge, a bet-
ter organization of capital and labour in the productive process and so on? Growth identities 
cannot distinguish between such competing hypotheses.
113
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
The production function approach to the analysis of growth is a response to this challenge. It 
takes the concept of the aggregate production function and attempts to disaggregate the sources 
of growth into the contribution of labour, capital, technical progress and any other variable 
included in the production function that is thought to influence the growth process. In this sense, 
it is a very versatile approach. It is, however, a supply-oriented approach. It does not tell us why 
the growth of capital, labour, technical progress and so on differs over time or between countries. 
The sources of growth are treated as exogenous. In practice, however, the supply of most resources 
to an economic system is endogenous, responding to the demand for them. Capital is a produced 
means of production and comes from the growth of output itself; labour is very elastic in supply 
from internal and external sources (migration), and technical progress is itself partly dependent 
on the growth of output arising from static and dynamic returns to scale.
Thus, while the production function approach can disaggregate any measured growth rate 
into various constituent growth-inducing sources, and can ‘explain’ growth rate differences in 
terms of these sources, it cannot answer the more fundamental question of why labour supply, 
capital accumulation and technical progress grow at different rates in different countries. The 
answer to this question must lie in differences in the strength of demand for countries’ products, 
which, in the early stages of development, depends largely on the prosperity of agriculture (see 
Chapter 5), and in the later stages of development depends largely on the country’s export per-
formance relative to its import propensity (see Chapter 16).
Having said this, the production function approach can provide a useful growth account-
ing exercise, which is in fact widely used. Apart from deciding which determinants of growth to 
specify in the production function, and accurately measuring the independent variables, the main 
problem is a methodological one of fitting the appropriate production function to the data; that 
is, specifying the function relating output to inputs.
The production function
A desirable property of any macroeconomic hypothesis, apart from being consistent with the 
observed facts, is that it should be consistent with and derivable from microeconomic theory. 
What we call the production function approach to the analysis of growth in the aggregate 
possesses, in part, this desirable property, in that it borrows the concept of the production 
function from the theory of the firm. Just as it can be said that, for a firm, output is a function 
of the factors of production – land, labour, capital and the level of technology (or factor effi-
ciency) – so aggregate output can be written as a function of factor inputs and the prevailing 
technology:
Y 5 f (R, K, L, T)
(4.19)
where R is land, K is capital, L is labour and T is technology.4
The question is how to separate empirically the contribution to output growth of the growth 
of factor inputs from other factors that can lead to higher output, included in T, such as econo-
mies of scale (due to technical change and increases in factor supplies), improvements in the 
quality of factor inputs, advances in knowledge, better organization of factors and so on. The 
task is to fit an appropriate, correctly specified production function that, if possible, will not only 
separate the contribution of factor inputs to growth from the contribution of increases in output 
per unit of inputs (increases in ‘total’ factor productivity), but will also distinguish between some 
of the factors that may contribute to increases in the productivity of factors, such as education, 
improvements in the quality of capital, and economies of scale.
114
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Before going on to discuss the types of function that may be employed, let us examine in a 
little more detail the properties of a production function. We have established so far that the 
aggregate production function expresses the functional relation between aggregate output and 
the stock of inputs. If land is subsumed into capital, and technology is held constant, we are left 
with two factors, and the production function may be drawn on a two-dimensional diagram, as 
in Figure 4.5. Capital (K) is measured on the vertical axis and labour (L) on the horizontal axis, 
and each function represents a given level of output that can be produced with different combin­
ations of capital and labour. The functions slope negatively from left to right on the assumption 
that marginal additions of either factor will increase total output – that is, factors have positive 
marginal products – and they are drawn convex to the origin on the assumption that factors have 
a diminishing marginal productivity as their supply increases, so that if one unit is withdrawn, it 
needs to be substituted by more and more of the other factor to keep output constant. The posi-
tion of the functions broadly reflects the level of technology. The more ‘advanced’ the technol-
ogy, the greater the level of output per unit of total inputs, and the closer to the origin will be the 
production function representing a given output.
Figure 4.5  The production function
K
L
0
300
200
100
Figure 4.6  Production function diagram
K
0
K1
L1
L2
Limit
L
400
300
200
100
From the simple production function diagram, it is easy to see how output may increase. 
First, there may be a physical increase in factor inputs, L and K, permitting a higher level of 
production. Either or both factors may increase. If only one factor increases, the movement to 
a higher production function will involve a change in the combination of factors, and output 
will not be able to increase forever, because ultimately the marginal product of the variable 
factor will fall to zero. This is illustrated in Figure 4.6, where, with a given stock of capital 0K1, 
output cannot increase beyond 300 with increases in the supply of labour (0L1, 0L2 and so on) 
beyond the limit indicated. The diminishing productivity of the variable factor, labour, with 
115
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
capital fixed, is shown by the flatter and flatter slope of the production functions at successive 
points, L1, L2, until, at the limit, the production function is horizontal and the marginal product 
of labour is zero.
If both factors increase in supply, however, there is no reason why output should not go on 
increasing indefinitely. In fact, if both factors increase in supply, there is a possibility that produc-
tion may be subject to increasing returns, such that output rises more than proportionately to the 
increase in combined inputs. If this is the case, output per unit of total inputs will increase and the 
production functions representing equal additional amounts of production, for example 100, 200, 
300 and so on, must be drawn closer and closer together, as in Figure 4.7.
In the opposite case of decreasing returns, the functions would be drawn further and further 
apart. Finally, in the case of production subject to constant returns, the functions would be drawn 
equidistant from one another.
Increasing returns may also result from advances in technology, irrespective of increases 
in factor supplies. These are called technological economies of scale. In this case, increases 
in output per unit of input would have to be represented on a production function diagram 
either by relabelling the functions or relabelling the axes. That is, either the same amount of 
factor inputs, measured on the axes, would have to be shown to be producing a higher output 
than before, or the same output could be shown to be produced by lesser amounts of inputs. 
If the functions are relabelled and not the axes, this is tantamount to a shift in all the produc-
tion functions towards the origin. Shifts in the production function towards the origin are 
implied by all forms of technical progress or any factor that increases the productivity of the 
physical inputs.
In short, three broad sources of growth can be distinguished using the production function 
framework:
1.	 Increases in factor supplies
2.	 Increasing returns
3.	 Technical progress, interpreted in the wide sense of anything that increases the productivity of 
factors other than increasing returns.
The Cobb–Douglas production function
The production function most commonly fitted to aggregate data to distinguish empirically 
between these three broad sources of growth has been the unconstrained form of the Cobb–
Douglas production function, named after its two American originators, Charles Cobb (a math-
ematician) and Paul Douglas (an economist), who pioneered research in the area of applied 
Figure 4.7  The effect of increasing returns
K
L
0
400
300
200
100
116
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
economic growth in the 1920s and 1930s (Cobb and Douglas, 1928). The Cobb–Douglas function 
may be written as:
Yt 5 Tt Kt
a Lt
b
(4.20)
where Yt is real output at time, t, Tt is an index of technology, or ‘total’ productivity, Kt is an index 
of the capital stock, or capital services, at constant prices, Lt is an index of labour input (preferably 
man-hours), a is the partial elasticity (responsiveness) of output with respect to capital (holding 
labour constant), and b is the partial elasticity of output with respect to labour (holding capital 
constant).
It is assumed that changes in technology are exogenous and independent of changes in factor 
inputs, and that the effect of technical progress is neutral on the factor intensity of production 
(see Chapter 6 for a definition of neutral technical progress). Tt, a and b are constants to be esti-
mated empirically if the function is unconstrained. If a and b are assigned values in advance of 
the use of the function for estimating purposes, the function is said to be constrained. Normally, 
a and b will be less than unity on the assumption of diminishing marginal productivity of factors. 
The sum of the partial elasticities of output with respect to the factors of production gives the 
scale of returns, or the degree of homogeneity, of the function: a 1 b 5 1 represents constant 
returns, a 1 b . 1 represents increasing returns, and a 1 b , 1 represents decreasing returns, 
and the function is said to be homogeneous of degree one, greater than one, and less than one, 
respectively.
If a and b are not estimated empirically but are assumed to sum to unity, in which case the 
function will be constrained to constant returns, then increasing or decreasing returns will be 
reflected in the value of T
t, which is the index of total factor productivity. The existence of increas-
ing returns would bias the value of Tt upwards, and decreasing returns would bias the value of 
Tt downwards. These points are made because, in practice, the Cobb–Douglas function is often 
employed in this constrained form with the sum of a and b put equal to unity. Then values are 
assigned to a and b according to the share of capital and labour in the national income. The 
underlying assumption is the perfectly competitive one that if production is subject to constant 
returns and factors are paid the value of their marginal products, then factor shares will reflect the 
elasticity of output with respect to each factor.5
In order to use equation (4.20) to separate the influence of the three broad sources of growth 
mentioned earlier, we must first make it operational by transforming it into rate of growth form. 
This can be done by taking logarithms of the variables and differentiating with respect to time, 
which gives:6
d log Yt
dt
  5  
d log Tt
dt
  1 a
  d log Kt
dt
  1 b  d log Lt
dt

(4.21)
or:
dY
dt  3  
 1
Y  5  adT
dt   3 1
Tb 1 aadK
dt  3 1
Kb 1 badL
dt 3  
1
Lb
The above equations are in continuous time. The discrete approximation, taking annual rates of 
change of the variables, may be written as:
rY 5 rT 1 arK 1 brL
(4.22)
where rY is the annual rate of growth of output per time period, rT is the annual rate of growth of 
total productivity, or technical progress, rK is the annual rate of growth of capital, rL is the annual 
117
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
rate of growth of labour, and a and b are the partial elasticities of output with respect to capital 
and labour, respectively, as before.
In other words, equation (4.22) says that the rate of growth of output is equal to the sum of 
the rate of growth of ‘total’ factor productivity, the rate of growth of capital weighted by the 
 
partial elasticity of output with respect to capital and the rate of growth of labour weighted by 
the partial elasticity of output with respect to labour. With knowledge of rY, rK, rL, a and b, it 
becomes possible as a first step to separate out the contribution of factor inputs to growth from 
increases in output per unit of inputs represented by rT. Now let us give an illustrative example. 
Suppose rY 5 5% per annum, rK 5 5% per annum, rL 5 1% per annum, a 5 0.25 and b 5 0.75 
(decided on the basis of factor shares). Substituting in equation (4.22), we have:
5.0 5 rT 1 0.25 (5.0) 1 0.75 (1.0)
(4.23)
The contribution of capital to measured growth is 0.25 (5.0) 5 1.25 percentage points; the contri-
bution of labour is 0.75 (1.0) 5 0.75 percentage points; and rT is left as a residual with a contribu-
tion of 3.0 percentage points. If a and b were estimated empirically and there happened to be 
increasing returns (a 1 b . 1), the significance of the factor contribution would be enhanced 
and rT would be smaller.
On the assumption of constant returns to scale, the production function can also be esti-
mated in its so-called labour-intensive form to analyse the growth of output per head (see equa-
tion (4.14)). If we subtract rL from both sides of equation (4.22) and assume a 1 b 5 1, so that 
 
b 5 1 2 a, we get:
rY 2 rL 5 rT 1 a (rK 2 rL)
(4.24)
which means that the rate of growth of output per head (or labour productivity) is equal to the 
sum of the rate of growth of total productivity plus the rate of growth of capital per head times 
the elasticity of output with respect to capital. Taking the illustrative figures above, if rY 5 5% and 
rL 5 1%, then the rate of labour productivity growth is 4%. Therefore:
4.0 5 rT 1 0.25 (5.0 2 1.0)
(4.25)
The contribution of capital per head (capital deepening) to productivity growth is 1 percentage 
point, leaving rT with a contribution of 3 percentage points (as before).
Although rT has been variously called ‘technical progress’, ‘advances in knowledge’ and so on, it 
is, by definition, that portion of the growth of output not attributable to increases in the factors 
of production, and includes the effects not only of the multifarious factors that increase the prod­
uctivity of labour and capital but also any measurement errors in the capital and labour input 
series. Perhaps rT is best described as a residual, or, perhaps more appropriately still, a ‘coefficient 
of ignorance’ if the analysis proceeds no further.
One important component of rT , which can be considered the result of measurement errors, is 
likely to be the effect of resource shifts from less productive to more productive activities. Since the 
analysis is aggregative, there is bound to be a confounding of changes in actual output with changes 
in the composition of output unless the weights used for aggregating inputs are continually revised. 
Resource shifts from agriculture to industry can be expected to figure prominently in any produc-
tion function study of developing countries, as they do for studies of many advanced economies.
Limitations of the Cobb–Douglas function
Before considering some of the results of applying the Cobb–Douglas function to empirical data, 
we must briefly mention some of its limitations. Its use has come under attack on four main 
118
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
counts. First, since only one combination of factor inputs can be observed at any one time, there 
is an identification problem in attempting to distinguish shifts in the function (technical pro-
gress) from movements along the function (changes in factor intensity), unless the assumption of 
neutral technical progress is made. But technical progress may not be neutral and therefore the 
effects of technical progress and changing factor intensity become confused, biasing the results of 
the contribution of factor inputs and technical progress to growth.
Second, the assumption that technical progress is independent of increases in factor inputs 
can been questioned. This is not a specification error of the function itself, however, and the 
Cobb–Douglas function can be used, making technical progress a function of the rate of growth 
of inputs – so-called ‘endogenous models of technical progress’.
Third, the Cobb–Douglas function possesses the restrictive property of constant unitary elas-
ticity of substitution between factors, whatever the factor intensity.7 The assumption of constant 
elasticity means that the function cannot represent a change in the ease of substitution between 
capital and labour. The assumption of unitary elasticity may be serious if the elasticity of substitu-
tion of factors differs significantly from unity and there are wide discrepancies in the growth rate 
of factors. For example, if the elasticity of substitution between capital and labour is significantly 
less than unity, and capital grows faster than labour, this will result in an overestimate of the 
contribution of capital to growth and an underestimate of the role of other factors. The intuitive 
explanation of this bias is that the smaller the elasticity of substitution, the more difficult it is in 
practice to obtain increased output just by increasing one factor, because diminishing returns 
set in strongly. By assuming the elasticity is higher than it is, the importance of the fastest grow-
ing factor is exaggerated. If elasticity is high, diminishing returns are not a problem, and if both 
capital and labour expand at the same rate, growth is obviously independent of the elasticity of 
substitution.8
A final criticism relates to the measurement of output and inputs. What, argue some, is the 
meaning of a function that aggregates so many heterogeneous items; in particular, what is the 
meaning of an aggregation of capital goods built at different times, at different costs and with 
varying productivities? How are such capital goods to be equated and added in an aggregate 
measure of capital?
By and large, most of the above-mentioned criticisms are theoretical worries, the practical 
significance of which is hard to determine. Studies of the nature of technical progress, at least in 
advanced countries, suggest that the assumption of neutrality is a fair working hypothesis. The 
fact that technical progress may be dependent on factor accumulation can be accommodated 
within the Cobb–Douglas framework. Capital and labour would have to grow at very different 
rates for the value of the elasticity of substitution to matter very much, but, in any case, studies 
show that it is quite close to unity. Finally, although the aggregation of heterogeneous outputs 
and inputs can present severe problems, especially the aggregation of capital, which cannot be 
measured directly in physical units, there are techniques of aggregation available that various 
studies have used with some success.
Application of the Cobb–Douglas function
What have been the results of applying the Cobb–Douglas function to empirical data? First, let us 
consider its application in developed countries and consider the conclusions that emerge. We can 
start with the pioneering work of Cobb and Douglas themselves. Ironically, the Cobb–Douglas 
function, as first conceived, was not intended as a device for distinguishing the sources of growth 
but as a test of neoclassical marginal productivity theory; that is, to see whether elasticities of 
119
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
output with respect to labour and capital corresponded to the shares of factors of production in 
national income. Douglas had observed that the output curve for US manufacturing industry for 
the period 1899–1922 lay consistently between the two curves for the factors of production, and 
he suggested to his mathematician friend Cobb that they should seek to develop a formula that 
could measure the relative effect of labour and capital on the growth of output over the period 
in question. This story is described by Douglas (1948 p. 20) in his fascinating review article ‘Are 
There Laws of Production?’ As an insight into the inductive method, the relevant passage is worth 
quoting in full:
Having computed indexes for American manufacturing of the number of workers employed 
by years from 1899 to 1922 as well as indexes of the amounts of fixed capital in manufacturing 
deflated to dollars of approximately constant purchasing power, and then plotting these on 
a log scale, together with the Day index of physical production for manufacturing, I observed 
that the product curve lay consistently between the two curves for the factors of production 
and tended to be approximately one-quarter of the relative distance between the curve of 
the index for labour, which showed the least increase in the period, and that of the index of 
capital which showed the most. I suggested to my friend Charles Cobb that we seek to develop 
a formula which could measure the relative effect of labour and capital upon product during 
this period. At his suggestion the sum of the exponents was tentatively made equal to unity 
in the formula Y 5 TKaL12a [our notation] . . . The fact that on the basis of fairly wide studies 
there is an appreciable degree of uniformity, and that the sum of the exponents approximates 
to unity, fairly clearly suggests that there are laws of production which can be approximated 
by inductive studies and that we are at least approaching them.
The estimated function derived was Y 5 1.01K0.25L0.75, which lent support to the neoclassical 
model of constant returns and marginal product pricing. There was no discussion of the relative 
importance of factors of production and the T variable in accounting for measured growth. It was 
not until Abramovitz (1956) and Solow (1957) showed that 80–90% of the growth of output per 
head in the US economy in the first half of the twentieth century could not be accounted for by 
increases in capital per head that the production function started to be used in earnest as a tech-
nique in the applied economics of growth. Abramovitz (1956, p. 11) remarked that:
This result is surprising in the lop-sided importance which it appears to give to productivity 
increase and it should be, in a sense, sobering, if not discouraging to students of economic 
growth. Since we know little about the causes of productivity increase, the indicated import­
ance of this element may be taken to be some sort of measure of our ignorance about the 
causes of economic growth in the USA, and some sort of indication of where we need to 
concentrate our attention.
Abramovitz’s findings were supported by Solow, who found, when examining the data for the 
non-farm sector of the US economy for the period 1919–57, that approximately 90% of the 
growth of output per head could not be accounted for by increases in capital per head; that is, 
using the notation in equation (4.24):
rT /(rY 2 rL) 5 0.90
(4.26)
The findings of Abramovitz and Solow disturbed economists brought up in the belief that 
investment and capital accumulation played a crucial role in the growth process. Even allowing 
120
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
for the statistical difficulties of computing a series of the capital stock, and the limitations of the 
function applied to the data (for example, the assumption of constant returns and neutral techni-
cal progress, plus the high degree of aggregation), it was difficult to escape from the conclusion 
that the growth of the capital stock was of relatively minor importance in accounting for the 
growth of total output.
It would not be misleading to say that much of the subsequent research effort in this field of 
growth was designed (even before the advent of new growth theory) to reverse this conclusion, 
or rather to ‘assign back’ to the factors of production sources of growth that make up the residual 
factor but are interrelated with, or dependent on, the growth of factor inputs. Work has pro-
ceeded on two fronts. On the one hand, attempts have been made to disaggregate the residual 
factor, measuring factor inputs in the conventional way; on the other hand, attempts have been 
made to adjust the labour and capital input series for such things as changes in the quality of 
factors and their composition, so that much more measured growth is seen to be attributable to 
increases in factor inputs in the first place. For example, the labour input series has been adjusted 
for improvements in its quality due to the growth of education, and for changes in its composi-
tion due to age/sex shifts. Likewise, the capital stock series has been adjusted to reflect changes 
in its composition and, more importantly, to allow for the fact that new additions to the capital 
stock in any line of production are likely to be more productive than the existing capital stock as 
a result of technical advance. This is the notion of embodied or endogenous technical change as 
opposed to the exogenous technical change assumption of the original Cobb–Douglas function, 
which assumes that all vintages of capital share equally in technical progress.
A distinction is made, therefore, between embodied and disembodied technical progress – 
‘embodied technical progress’ refers to technical improvements that can only be introduced into 
the productive system by new investment, and ‘disembodied technical progress’ is exogenous 
and not dependent on capital accumulation. There are several ways in which embodied technical 
progress can be isolated from the residual factor by appropriate adjustments to the capital stock 
series to reflect the greater productivity of the latest investments. The net result is to enhance the 
role of capital accumulation in the growth process.
Efforts have also been made to overcome one of the problems associated with the aggregation 
of outputs by taking explicit account of shifts of labour and capital from low-productivity to high-
productivity sectors. This, too, reduces the significance of the residual factor and makes the role of 
labour and capital in the growth process look correspondingly more important.
Since Abramovitz and Solow reported their findings in 1956 and 1957, a substantial body of 
empirical evidence relating to the sources of growth has accumulated, experimenting with differ-
ent specifications of the aggregate production function. Unfortunately, it is not systematic. The 
time periods taken, the data used, the sectors of the economy examined, and the methodology 
employed all vary within and between countries.
Until recently, most of the evidence available pertained to fairly advanced economies and it is 
largely from this evidence, wisely or not, that conclusions have been drawn on development strat-
egy for developing countries. Research in developing countries has been hampered by a short-
age of reliable empirical data and perhaps an even greater suspicion of the aggregate production 
function, and its implicit assumptions, than in developed countries. The assumption that factor 
shares can be used as weights to measure the relative contribution of labour and capital to growth 
is probably more dubious in developing countries than in developed countries. First, the price 
of labour almost certainly exceeds its marginal product, while the price of capital falls short of 
it so that the share of income going to labour exceeds the elasticity of output with respect to 
labour and the share of income going to capital understates the elasticity of output with respect 
121
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
to capital. Second, the aggregation of inputs and outputs is generally more difficult, and there 
are greater problems of resource underutilization to contend with. The recent past, however, has 
witnessed a number of production function studies for developing countries.
Production function studies of developing countries
Two of the early production function studies of the sources of growth in developing countries are 
by Maddison (1970) and Robinson (1971) (surveyed, with others, by Nadiri, 1972). More recent 
studies include the World Bank (1991), Young (1995), Hu and Khan (1997), Felipe (1999), Senhadji 
(2000), and Sala-í-Martin (1997) who surveys other studies. Let us consider these studies and 
bring out their major conclusions, especially any important contrasts with the conclusions from 
studies of developed countries.
The major conclusions of the early production function studies of developing countries were:
•
• Capital accumulation is more important as a source of growth than total productivity growth, 
and more important than in developed countries.
•
• Improvements in the quality of labour are important through better health, nutrition and edu-
cation.
•
• Resource shifts are not as important as might have been expected, perhaps due to the general 
surplus of labour in developing countries and the low capacity to absorb labour into productive 
employment in the industrial sector.
Now let us turn to the more recent studies. Table 4.1 provides the results of a World Bank study 
for the period 1960–87, showing the contribution of factor inputs and total productivity growth 
to the growth of output in various continents. It is clear that the major source of growth is not 
productivity growth, but the growth of inputs themselves.
Young (1995) has used the production function model to debunk the idea that there has been 
a ‘growth miracle’ in the four East Asian countries of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and 
Taiwan (the so-called ‘tigers’ or ‘little dragons’). Young uses the production function approach 
and shows that while the growth of output was spectacular over the 1966–90 period, most of the 
growth can be accounted for by the rapid growth of factor inputs and there was nothing abnor-
mal about the growth of total factor productivity. Table 4.2 presents the figures. Young describes 
such calculations as ‘the tyranny of numbers’, by which he means that there is nothing special to 
explain. On the basis of Young’s calculations, Krugman (1994) has described the ‘Asian miracle’ 
Table 4.1  Contribution of factor inputs and total productivity growth to economic growth in 68 
developing countries, 1960–87
GDP growth 
(% p.a.)
Contribution 
of labour
Contribution 
of capital
Total factor 
productivity
Africa
3.3
1.0
2.3
0.0
East Asia
6.8
1.1
3.8
1.9
Europe, Middle East and North Africa
5.0
0.7
2.9
1.4
Latin America
3.6
1.2
2.4
0.0
South Asia
4.4
0.9
2.9
0.6
68 economies
4.2
1.0
2.6
0.6
Source: World Bank, 1991.
122
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
as a myth. The spectacular growth of inputs, however, does need explaining. The rapid growth of 
capital and labour is a function of an internal dynamism fuelled by the relentless and successful 
drive for export markets, partly engineered by deliberate government intervention. East Asia is 
not the bastion of free-market enterprise that is often portrayed. The growth of factor inputs may 
decelerate in the future, but the performance of these four economies up to 1990 was indeed 
remarkable, notwithstanding the relatively low rate of growth of total factor productivity.
Hu and Khan (1997) use the production function9 approach to understand the sources of fast 
growth in China over the period 1953–94, and the acceleration of growth after the economic 
reforms and ‘open door’ policy were introduced in 1978. From 1953 to 1978, GDP grew at 5.8% per 
annum, and then accelerated to 9.3% per annum from 1979 to 1994. Why was this? To estimate 
the contribution of labour, capital and total factor productivity (TFP) to measured growth over 
the periods, factor shares of GDP are taken as the elasticities of output with respect to labour and 
capital, with labour’s elasticity approximately 0.4, and capital’s elasticity approximately 0.6. The 
results are shown in Table 4.3.
To give an example, in the pre-reform period 1953–78, the growth of capital was 6.2% per 
annum. Multiplying 6.2 by 0.6 (capital’s elasticity) gives a contribution of capital to growth of 
3.72 percentage points, which is approximately 65% of the total growth of output of 5.8%. Capital 
accumulation was by far the most important contributor to growth in this period. In the post-
reform period 1979–94, however, it can be seen that the contribution of productivity growth 
increases considerably to almost equal importance with capital. The rate of growth of TFP more 
than triples, from 1.1% per annum to 3.9%, contributing over 40% to measured growth. According 
to Hu and Khan (1997), the process of reform stimulated productivity growth in a number of 
ways, including the transfer of resources from agriculture to industry, a reallocation of resources 
from the public to the private sector, the encouragement of foreign direct investment (FDI), and 
a faster growth of exports.
Table 4.2  Growth of output and total factor productivity in the East Asian ‘tigers’, 1966–90 (%)
Output growth
Total factor productivity growth
Hong Kong
7.3
2.3
Singapore
8.7
0.2
South Korea
8.5
1.7
Taiwan
8.5
2.1
Source: Compiled from Young, 1995.
Table 4.3  Sources of growth in China, 1953–94 (%)
1953–94
1953–78
1979–94
Output growth
  7.2
  5.8
  9.3
Capital input growth
  6.8
  6.2
  7.7
Labour input growth
  2.6
  2.5
  2.7
TFP growth
  2.1
  1.1
  3.9
Contribution of capital
55.6
65.2
45.6
Contribution of labour
14.9
16.8
12.8
Contribution of productivity growth
29.5
18.0
41.6
Source: Hu and Khan, 1997.
123
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
Felipe (1999) surveys the studies done of TFP growth in the whole of East Asia, most of which 
use the production function approach. He is critical of many of them, and shows how estimates 
of TFP can vary according to the time period taken, the estimates made of the growth of factor 
inputs, and the assumed elasticities of output with respect to labour and capital. Remember that 
TFP is obtained as a residual after the contribution of the factor inputs has been calculated. The 
various methodological and conceptual problems associated with the use of production func-
tions discussed earlier are also emphasized, particularly the assumption that technical progress 
and factor inputs are exogenous and not interrelated.
The most comprehensive recent study of the sources of growth using the aggregate production 
function comes from Senhadji (2000) at the IMF. He estimates production functions for 66 coun-
tries over the period 1960–94 (including 46 developing countries) of the form: Y 5 TKa(LH)12a, 
where T is TFP, K is the stock of capital, L is the active population and H is an index of human cap­
ital. The function is estimated using both levels of the variables (measured in logarithms) and tak-
ing first differences of the log level (i.e. in rate of growth form – see equation (4.21)). The estimates 
of the elasticity of output with respect to capital (a) vary considerably across countries (and 
regions) and also according to whether levels or first differences of the variables are used (which is 
another problem). Using levels, the estimates of (a) range from 0.43 in sub-Saharan Africa to 0.63 
in the Middle East and North Africa. Using first differences, the estimates of a range from 0.30 
in East Asia to 0.62 in Latin America. Using the mean value of a from the equations estimated in 
levels gives the sources of growth in different regions shown in Table 4.4.
It can be seen again from Table 4.4 that capital accumulation is by far the most important 
contributor to measured growth in all the regions. The small contribution of TFP in the fastest 
growing region of East Asia confirms the conclusions of Young (1995). Notice also, the negative 
contribution of TFP in Africa and Latin America. Human capital formation makes a positive con-
tribution to growth in all regions, but a relatively minor one.
It is satisfying that the conclusions from a wide range of studies using different techniques and 
dubious data should all point in roughly the same direction:
1.	 The major source of growth in developing countries is increased factor inputs, aided by im-
provements in the quality of labour through health improvement and education.
2.	 The growth of ‘total’ factor productivity in developing countries is relatively slow compared 
with that in developed countries, which may be partly a reflection of the different stage of 
development reached.
3.	 Resource transfers from agriculture to industry are quite important as a source of growth, but 
not as important as one might have expected. They will become more important as the ability 
of the industrial sector to absorb surplus labour increases.
Table 4.4  Sources of growth by region of the world, 1960–94
Region
Output growth (%)
Contribution (percentage points) of:
TFP
Capital
Labour
Human capital
East Asia
6.49
4.50
1.27
0.44
  0.28
South Asia
4.66
2.87
0.99
0.25
  0.55
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.83
1.79
1.39
0.22
−0.56
Middle East & North Africa
5.05
3.99
0.84
0.25
−0.03
Latin America
3.42
2.31
1.22
0.28
−0.39
Source: Senhadji, 2000.
124
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Before ending, it should be said again that the aggregate models that produced the above 
results are rough tools. They do, however, give an important idea of the forces at work and a rough 
idea of the likely quantitative significance of different factors. The production function approach 
is also a versatile tool of analysis. Sala-í-Martin (1997) has surveyed a number of production func-
tion studies and found that researchers have included at least 62 different variables in the produc-
tion function to explain growth, in addition to the growth of capital and labour.
‘New’ (endogenous) growth theory and the macrodeterminants  
of growth10
Since the mid-1980s there has been an outpouring of literature and research on the applied eco-
nomics of growth, attempting to understand and explain the differences in the rates of output 
growth and per capita income growth across the world, many inspired by the so-called ‘new’ 
growth theory, or endogenous growth theory. This spate of cross-sectional studies seems to have 
been prompted by a number of factors:
•
• Increased concern with the economic performance of the poorer regions of the world, and 
particularly the striking differences between countries and continents.
•
• The increased availability of standardized data (e.g. Summers and Heston, 1991; and the World 
Bank World Development Indicators), enabling more reliable econometric work.
•
• Pioneering studies (e.g. Baumol, 1986) that could find no convergence of per capita incomes 
in the world economy, contrary to the prediction of neoclassical growth theory based on the 
assumption of diminishing returns to capital, which, given identical preferences and technology 
across countries, should lead to faster growth in poor countries than in rich ones.
It is the latter finding (although hardly new, as outlined in Chapter 2) that has been the major 
inspiration behind the development of the ‘new’ growth theory, which relaxes the assumption of 
diminishing returns to capital and shows that, with constant or increasing returns, there can be no 
presumption of the convergence of per capita incomes across the world, or of individual countries 
reaching a long-run steady-state growth equilibrium at the natural rate. If there are not diminish-
ing returns to capital, investment is important for long-run growth and growth is endogenous in 
this sense. In these ‘new’ models of endogenous growth, pioneered by Robert Lucas (1988) and 
Paul Romer (1986, 1990), there are assumed to be positive externalities associated with human 
capital formation (e.g. education and training) and research and development (R&D) that pre-
vent the marginal product of capital from falling and the capital–output ratio from rising. We 
have a production function in capital of:
Y 5 AKa
(4.27)
where K is a composite measure of capital (i.e. physical capital plus other types of reproducible 
capital), and a 5 1. This is the so-called AK model of new growth theory. As Barro and Sala-í-
Martin (2003) put it: ‘the global absence of diminishing returns may seem unrealistic, but the idea 
becomes more plausible if we think of K in a broad sense to include [for example] human capital’. 
It can be seen from the expression for the capital–output ratio, that is:
K
Y  5   
K
L .  L
Y
(4.28)
that anything that raises the productivity of labour (Y/L) in the same proportion as K/L will keep 
the capital–output ratio constant. Learning by doing and embodied technical progress in the 
125
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
spirit of Arrow (1962) and Kaldor (1957), as well as technological spillovers from trade (Grossman 
and Helpman, 1990, 1991) and FDI (de Mello, 1996), are other possibilities in addition to educa-
tion and R&D.
The first crude test of the new growth theory is to see whether or not poor countries do grow 
faster than rich ones, or, in other words, to see whether there is an inverse relation between the 
growth of output (or output per head) and the initial level of per capita income. If there is, this 
would provide support for the neoclassical model. If there is not, this would support the new 
growth theory’s assertion that the marginal product of capital does not decline. The equation to 
be estimated is:
gi 5 a 1 b1 (PCY)i
(4.29)
where gi is the average growth of output per head of country i over a number of years and PCYi is 
its initial level of per capita income. A significantly negative estimate of b1 would be evidence of 
unconditional convergence, or beta (a) convergence as it is called in the literature; that is, poor 
countries growing faster than rich without allowing for any other economic, social or political dif-
ferences between countries. As we saw in Chapter 2, none of the studies taking large samples of 
developed and developing countries has been able to find evidence of unconditional convergence. 
The estimate of b1 is not significantly negative; in fact, it is invariably positive, indicating divergence.11
Before jumping to the conclusion that this is a rejection of the neoclassical model, it must be 
remembered that the neoclassical prediction of convergence assumes that the savings or invest-
ment ratio, population growth, technology and all factors that affect the productivity of labour 
are the same across countries. Since these assumptions are manifestly false, there can never be 
the presumption of unconditional convergence (even if there are diminishing returns to capital), 
only conditional convergence, holding constant all other factors that influence the growth of 
per capita income, including population growth (p), the investment ratio (I/Y) and variables that 
affect the productivity of labour, for example education (ED), research and development expend­
iture (R 1 D), trade (T) and even non-economic variables such as political stability measured by 
the number of revolutions and coups (PS). The equation to be estimated is therefore:
gi 5 a 1 b1(PCY)i 1 b2(p)i 1 b3(I/Y)i 1 b4(ED)i 1 b5(R 1 D)i 1 b6(T)i 1 b7(PS)i 1 …
(4.30)
and the question to be asked is: What happens to the sign of the initial per capita income vari-
able (PCY) when these other variables are introduced into the equation? If the sign turns negative 
 
(b1 , 0) when allowance is made for these other factors, this is supposed to represent a 
re­
habilitation of the neoclassical model (see Barro, 1991); that is, there would be convergence if it 
were not for differences between rich and poor countries in all these other important variables 
in the growth process. New growth theory would be supported by finding that education, R&D 
expenditure and so on matter, and it is these factors that keep the marginal product of capital 
from falling, producing actual divergence in the world economy.
Note here that if the model of new growth theory is represented by the AK model, as in equa-
tion (4.27), this can be shown to be equivalent to the Harrod–Domar growth equation. Assuming 
a 5 1, totally differentiate equation (4.27) and divide by Y. This gives:
dY/Y 5 A(dK/Y) 5 A(I/Y)
(4.31)
where dY/Y is the growth rate, I/Y is the investment ratio, and A is the productivity of capital 
(dY/I), which is the reciprocal of the incremental capital–output ratio. This is the same as the 
Harrod growth equation g 5 s/c, where s is the savings ratio and c is the incremental capital–­
output ratio, or the Domar equation g 5 ss, where s is the productivity of capital.
126
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
If the productivity of capital was the same across countries, there would be a perfect cor-
relation between the growth rate of countries and the investment ratio where the slope of the 
relationship is the reciprocal of the incremental capital–output ratio (c). If there is not a perfect 
correlation, then, by definition, the productivity of capital, or the capital–output ratio, must differ 
between countries. New growth theory equations that attempt to explain growth rate differences 
between countries (such as equation (4.30) – and see empirical studies later) are really asking the 
question (and hopefully answering it): Why does the productivity of capital differ between coun-
tries (assuming I/Y is included in the equations)? (See Nell and Thirlwall, 2016.)
We said above that evidence of conditional convergence delights the neoclassical econo-
mists because it is interpreted as a rehabilitation of the neoclassical growth model with dimin-
ishing returns, but this may be a hasty judgement. Outside the neoclassical paradigm, there is 
another distinct body of literature that argues that economic growth should be inversely related 
to the initial level of per capita income because the more backward the country, the greater the 
scope for catch-up; that is, for absorbing a backlog of technology (see Gomulka, 1971, 1990; 
Abramovitz, 1986; Dowrick and Nguyen, 1989; Dowrick and Gemmell, 1991; Amable, 1993). 
Thus, the negative sign on the per capita income variable could be picking up the effect of 
catch-up, and the notion of catch-up is conceptually distinct from the shape of the produc-
tion function and whether or not there are diminishing returns to capital. How are the two 
effects to be distinguished? As Benhabib and Spiegel (1994) remark in their paper on the role of 
human capital in development: ‘a negative coefficient estimate on initial income levels may not 
be a sign of convergence due to diminishing returns, but of catch up from adoption of technol-
ogy from abroad. These two forces may be observationally equivalent in simple cross-section 
growth accounting exercises’. Also, output growth will be a function of the stage of develop-
ment because of sectoral differences in the productivity growth rates of agriculture, industry 
and services, so that convergence may also be partly ‘structural’, independent of both diminish-
ing returns and catch-up (see Cornwall and Cornwall, 1994). This adds further complications 
to the interpretation of the coefficient relating country growth rates to the initial level of per 
capita income.
Now let us turn to the question of the capital–output ratio. Non-diminishing returns to cap­
ital, or constancy of the capital–output ratio, lie at the heart of new growth theory, as pioneered 
by Lucas and Romer, who emphasize externalities to education and research. For the historical 
record, however, it should be mentioned that, many years ago, Cambridge economist Nicholas 
Kaldor pointed out the fact that despite continued capital accumulation and increases in capital 
per head through time, the capital–output ratio remains broadly the same, implying some form 
of externalities or constant returns to capital. It is worth quoting Kaldor (1961) in full:
As regards the process of economic change and development in capitalist societies, I suggest 
the following ‘stylised facts’ as a starting point for the construction of theoretical models . . . 
(4) steady capital–output ratios over long periods; at least there are no clear long-term trends, 
either rising or falling, if differences in the degree of capital utilisation are allowed for. This 
implies, or reflects, the near identity in the percentage rate of growth of production and of the 
capital stock i.e. for the economy as a whole, and over long periods, income and capital tend 
to grow at the same rate.
Kaldor’s explanation (as a critique of the neoclassical production function) lay in his innovation 
of the technical progress function, which relates the rate of growth of output per worker q
. to the 
rate of growth of capital per worker k
. , as depicted in Figure 4.8.
127
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
The position of the function depends on the exogenous rate of technical progress, and 
the slope of the function depends on the extent to which technical progress is embodied in 
capital. Along the 450 line the capital–output ratio is constant, and the equilibrium growth of 
output per head will be at q
.. An upward shift of the technical progress function – associated, 
for example, with new discoveries, a technological breakthrough or more education – will 
shift the curve upwards, causing the growth of output to exceed the growth of capital, raising 
the rate of profit and inducing more investment to give a new equilibrium growth of output 
per worker at q
.*
1. An increase in capital accumulation to .
k1 without an associated upward shift 
in the schedule will cause the capital–output ratio to rise. New growth theory is precisely 
anticipated. Kaldor’s technical progress function is the true progenitor of endogenous growth 
theory.
What applies to countries through time applies, pari passu, to different countries at a point in 
time, with differences in growth rates at the same capital–output ratio being associated with dif-
ferent technical progress functions. To quote Kaldor (1972, emphasis added) again:
A lower capital–labour ratio does not necessarily imply a lower capital–output ratio – indeed, 
the reverse is often the case. The countries with the most highly mechanised industries, such 
as the USA, do not require a higher ratio of capital to output. The capital–output ratio in the 
USA has been falling over the past 50 years whilst the capital–labour ratio has been steadily 
rising; and it is lower in the United States today than in the manufacturing industries of many 
underdeveloped countries.
In other words, rich and poor countries are simply not on the same production function.
Empirical studies
In this section we survey six pioneer studies of intercountry growth rate differences that have 
been inspired by new growth theory. A summary of the studies is given in Table 4.5. Before turn-
ing to the individual studies, it may be said from the outset that only four variables seem to be 
Figure 4.8  Kaldor’s technical progress function
q
k
·
·
·
·
k
·
q1
·
k1
q *
q = f(k)
·
·
0
45°
*
128
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Table 4.5  The macrodeterminants of growth
Study
Dependent 
variable
Convergence
Savings– 
investment 
ratio
Population 
growth
Education
Government 
consumption 
distortions
Political 
instability
Monetary 
and fiscal 
variables
Trade 
variables
Inflation
Barro 
(1991)
Growth of 
per capita 
income
Conditional
Significant (1)
Not considered
Significant (1)
Significant (2)
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Mankiw 
et al. (1992)
Level and 
growth of 
per capita 
income
Conditional
Significant (1)
Significant (2)
Significant (1)
Not considered
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Knight 
et al. (1993)
Growth of 
output per 
worker
Conditional
Significant (1)
Significant (2)
Significant (1)
Not considered
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Significant (1)
Not 
considered
Barro and 
Lee (1993)
Growth of 
per capita 
income
Conditional
Significant (1)
Not considered
Significant (1)
Significant (2)
Significant (2)
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Not 
considered
Levine 
and Renelt 
(1992)
Growth of 
per capita 
income
Conditional
Significant (1)
Not robust
Significant (1)
Not robust
Not robust
Not robust
Not robust
Not robust
Levine and 
Zervos 
(1993)
Growth of 
per capita 
income
Conditional
Not 
considered
Not considered
Significant (1)
Not considered
Significant (2)
Weak
Weak
Not 
significant
Note: Barro (1991), Mankiw et al. (1992), Knight et al. (1993) and Levine and Zervos (1993) – 98 countries, 1960–85; Barro and Lee (1993) – 116 countries, 1965–85; and Levine and Renelt (1992) – 119 countries, 1960–89.
129
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
robust in the sense that they remain statistically significant regardless of what other variables are 
included in the equation. Consider an equation of the form:
Y 5 biI 1 bmM 1 bzZ 1 μ
(4.32)
where I is a set of variables always in the regression, M is the variable of interest, and Z is a subset 
of variables added to the regression. As a first step, estimate the regression with the I variables (for 
example, PCY) and the variable of interest (say, investment). Then add up to three other variables 
and observe the significance of the variable of interest. If the variable remains significant without 
changing its sign, the variable is regarded as robust; otherwise, it is ‘fragile’. The only robust vari-
ables found in the majority of studies are the ratio of savings and investment to GDP, population 
growth, the initial level of per capita income, and investment in human capital measured by the 
secondary school enrolment rate. All other variables are fragile.
The six studies surveyed are Barro (1991), Mankiw et al. (1992), Levine and Renelt (1992), 
Levine and Zervos (1993), Barro and Lee (1993) and Knight et al. (1993).
Robert Barro has been one of the major investigators of new growth theory. He examines the 
growth of per capita income across 98 countries over the period 1960–85. He is interested in test-
ing the neoclassical growth model augmented by human capital formation. There is no significant 
relation between the initial level of PCY and the growth rate of PCY, which, on the surface, contra-
dicts the neoclassical model and supports the new models of endogenous growth, which assume 
non-diminishing returns to capital. In the first instance, however, he does not allow for differences 
in investment ratios and population growth. Instead, he augments the model by allowing for dif-
ferences in human capital formation, proxied by school enrolment ratios. With this additional 
variable, PCY growth is found to be negatively related to initial levels of PCY, which, he argues, 
supports the neoclassical (conditional) convergence hypothesis.
An interesting difference between ‘continents’ is apparent. The Pacific Rim countries in 1960 
had higher human capital formation than predicted by the level of PCY and grew rapidly, while 
Africa had lower human capital formation than predicted by PCY and grew slowly. Countries with 
high ratios of human capital formation also seem to have lower fertility rates and higher ratios of 
physical investment to GDP, which means that the human capital variable is likely to be picking 
up differences in population growth and investment ratios.
Mankiw et al. (1992) take three samples of countries over the period 1960–85: 98 non-oil-
producing countries, 76 developing countries (excluding small countries and those where data are 
doubtful), and 22 OECD countries with a population of more than 1 million. First, they take the 
level of PCY as the dependent variable and find that differences in savings rates and population 
growth account for over 50% of income differences in the large sample of countries, which is sup-
port for the second basic proposition of neoclassical growth theory. However, the cross-section 
regression implies a much higher elasticity of output with respect to capital than capital’s share of 
national income, so that the empirical model overpredicts. The authors thus augment the model 
for differences in human capital formation, proxied by secondary school enrolment rates, and 
find that the augmented Solow model ‘explains’ 80% of differences in PCY, and human capital 
formation is a significant variable in all three samples of countries. Regressing the growth of PCY 
on initial PCY levels shows no tendency for convergence (except in the OECD sample), but there 
is evidence for conditional convergence in all three samples if differences in investment ratios and 
population growth are allowed for. It is therefore claimed by Mankiw et al. (1992) that the data 
give support to the Solow neoclassical model against the new endogenous growth models, which, 
because of the assumption of non-diminishing returns to capital, predict that differences in PCY 
between countries will persist indefinitely or even widen.
130
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Knight et al. (1993) extend Mankiw et al.’s study in two ways. First, they use panel data (that 
is, pooled time-series and cross-section data) to look at country-specific effects. Second, they 
assume that the rate of technical progress is influenced by the ‘outwardness’ of trade policy 
and by the stock of infrastructure investment (proxied by the ‘flow’ variable, government fixed 
investment as a proportion of GDP). Trade is assumed to influence technical progress in two 
ways: through technological transfers, and through greater availability of foreign exchange, which 
en­
ables countries to purchase technologically superior capital goods. Tests of the model, taking 
two samples (76 developing countries and 22 OECD countries), show that the growth of output 
per worker is positively related to the savings ratio, and negatively related to the growth of popu-
lation and the initial level of PCY; that is, there is evidence of conditional convergence. Human 
capital investment is significant and raises the productivity of physical investment. The tests of 
trade ‘openness’, and the role of infrastructure investment, also show significant positive effects 
and enhance the coefficient on physical capital.
Barro and Lee (1993) analyse 116 countries over the period 1965–85 and find that five factors 
differentiate reasonably well slow-growing countries from fast-growing countries:
1.	 The initial level of PCY (relative to educational and health attainment), which has a negative 
effect (that is, there is evidence of conditional convergence).
2.	 The investment ratio (1).
3.	 The ratio of government consumption to GDP (−).
4.	 Market distortions measured by the black market rate of foreign exchange (−).
5.	 Political instability measured by the number of political ‘revolutions’ per year (−).
These five variables ‘explain’ 80% of the growth rate differences between countries. No trade vari-
ables are included in the analysis.
Levine and Renelt (1992) show that cross-country regression results are ‘fragile’ to model 
selection and datasets, but at least two ‘robust’ results stand out: the relation between invest-
ment and growth, and the relation between the investment ratio and the ratio of international 
trade to GDP. Levine and Renelt first take 119 countries over the period 1960–89 and use the 
growth of PCY as the dependent variable. The I (constant) variables used (see equation (4.32)) are 
the investment ratio, the initial level of PCY, the initial level of secondary school enrolment, and 
population growth. The pool of Z variables used includes government expenditure, exports, infla-
tion, the variance of inflation, domestic credit expansion and its variance, and political instability. 
When the Z variables are added to the I variables, the investment ratio remains robust, the initial 
PCY variable remains robust (that is, there is evidence of conditional convergence), the secondary 
school enrolment rate is robust, but not population growth. None of the Z variables themselves 
are robust, however; they depend on the conditioning variables, that is, which other Z variables 
are introduced. Levine and Renelt repeat the Barro (1991) study and find only the investment 
ratio and the initial level of PCY to be robust. No fiscal or monetary indicators are robust, and no 
trade variables. Levine and Renelt (1992) suggest that the importance of trade probably works 
through investment (rather than through improved resource allocation).
Levine and Zervos (1993) report new evidence on the ‘robustness’ of variables, taking a 
different set of I and Z variables. The I (constant) variables used are the Barro (1991) variables 
of initial PCY, initial secondary school enrolment rate and the number of political revolutions 
and coups. The results largely support the earlier findings of Levine and Renelt (1992), but no 
investment variable is included. Levine and Zervos pay particular attention to financial vari-
ables and the role of inflation. Various indicators of financial deepening are robust (which may 
be standing as a proxy for investment), and apparently there are no Z variables that make 
131
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
growth and inflation negatively correlated. Levine and Zervos (1993) comment that: ‘given the 
uncharacteristically unified view among economists and policy analysts that countries with 
high inflation rates should adopt policies that lower inflation in order to promote economic 
prosperity, the inability to find simple cross-country regressions supporting this contention is 
both surprising and troubling’ (see Chapter 13 for a discussion of the relation between inflation 
and growth).
The above studies relate to countries as a whole. Rodrik (2013), however, has found that if 
just the manufacturing sector of countries is considered, there is evidence of unconditional con-
vergence, taking a sample of over 100 developed and developing countries since 1990. This is, 
perhaps, not surprising, because manufacturing industries produce tradable goods subject to 
competitive pressure in a global environment where there is scope for technological transfer and 
the absorption of new knowledge. Traditional agriculture and non-traded goods do not share 
these characteristics. This suggests that lack of unconditional convergence across countries has 
to do with the structural characteristics of countries and particularly the relative shares of traded 
and non-traded goods.
What have we learned?
These studies (and many others not reported here) have revealed a lot about the sources of inter-
country growth rate differences. Interestingly, the variables of significance turn out to be those 
that have traditionally been at the heart of mainstream growth and development theory, particu-
larly the importance of investment and capital accumulation.
On the other hand, it is often the case that studies reach conflicting conclusions, and a large 
proportion of intercountry growth rate differences remain unexplained (as much as 40%). Why 
is this? One set of reasons relate to the availability and quality of data, and the econometric pro-
cedures used for testing. Often, data are weak and unreliable, and the econometric methodology 
used not only differs but is also questionable, because allowance has not been made for lags in the 
relationship between variables or intercorrelation between variables. A second set of reasons is 
that countries are much more heterogeneous in their structure and institutions than most studies 
allow for. As Kenny and Williams (2001) put it: ‘it is because countries are so heterogeneous in 
their make-up and institutions that cross section studies reach contradictory results and produce 
a lack of robustness’. They argue: ‘perhaps more energy should be directed towards understanding 
the complex and varied inner-workings of actual economies rather than trying to assimilate them 
into abstract universal models’.
A similar point is made by Putterman (2000), who argues that one of the important reasons 
why countries have grown at different rates over the past 60 years is that the preconditions for 
development were not equal in terms of institutional structure (the strength of government, 
for example), the tax system, the state of agriculture, the stock of knowledge and ideas and so 
on, and these factors are not well captured by the initial level of per capita income. Emphasis 
on preconditions, and why countries have responded differently to the possibilities of industri-
alization, goes back to Rostow’s ideas of the preconditions for take-off. To put it another way: 
economic history matters. The question is how to measure the level of ‘pre-modern’ devel-
opment. Putterman (2000) concentrates on the conditions prevailing in agriculture such as 
cultivatable land per head, population density, and the prevalence of irrigation. When these 
variables are included in regression equations, along with the investment ratio, population 
growth and education, there is an increase in the proportion of the variance in growth rates 
that is explained.
132
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Another serious weakness of new growth theory is that many of the models are closed econ-
omy models, and there are no demand constraints. It is difficult to imagine how growth rate dif-
ferences between countries can be explained without reference to trade, and without reference 
to the balance of payments position of countries, which in most developing economies consti-
tutes a major constraint on the growth of demand and output (see Chapter 16). Where a trade 
variable is included in the models tested, it is invariably insignificant, or loses its significance when 
combined with other variables. All this is very puzzling, given the rich theoretical and empirical 
literature that exists on the relation between trade and growth (see Chapter 15). There are at 
least two possible explanations. First, it could be that trade works through investment. Indeed, in 
some studies that look directly at the determinants of investment, trade and exports are found 
to be very significant. Second, the measure of trade taken is a very static one, usually measured 
as the share of trade in GDP. This may pick up the static gains from trade but not the dynamic 
gains. In a growth model, the most obvious trade variable to focus on is the growth of exports, 
which will favourably influence growth from the demand side (particularly by relaxing a balance 
of payments constraint on domestic demand), and from the supply side by raising import cap­
acity. Nell and Thirlwall (2016) show export growth to be the second most important variable 
after the investment ratio in explaining differences in the growth performance of 84 countries 
over the period 1980–2011.
Finally, a more fundamental issue is raised by Pritchett (2000), who argues that it is diffi-
cult to characterize the growth of many developing countries by a single time trend because 
growth is very volatile. Periods of rapid growth are often followed by plateaus and steep 
declines. Rapid and slow growth are, for the most part, transitory. Very few countries see 
their success or failure persist from decade to decade. Correlations of country growth rates 
across periods (e.g. 5–10 years) show very low correlations. Taking 111 countries over a 25-year 
period, Pritchett shows that in 55 of them, growth either accelerated or decelerated by more 
than 3 percentage points on at least one occasion over the period. In 40% of developing coun-
tries, trying to estimate a time trend for the growth of output gives a correlation coefficient 
of less than 0.5; and volatility around the trend is much higher for developing countries than 
developed countries. So Pritchett asks the question: What aspects of a country’s growth is 
growth theory trying to explain when growth is so ephemeral and volatile? If growth is so vola-
tile, it is no wonder that the variance of growth explained by traditional variables is relatively 
low. What is important is to analyse and explain the determinants of shifts in growth rates 
from one period to another.
Hausmann et al. (2005) try to do this. They take 106 countries over the period 1957–92, 
defining a ‘growth acceleration’ as an increase in PCY growth of 2% or more per annum over an 
eight-year period with a minimum growth rate of 3.5% per annum. Also the post-acceleration 
output level must exceed the pre-episode peak level of income (to rule out cases of pure 
recovery from deep depression). They find 83 episodes of growth accelerations, and 60 coun-
tries out of the 106 had at least one. The average growth acceleration is 4.7 percentage points. 
When they look at the causes of accelerations, however, they are struck by their unpredict-
ability. There is only a weak link between conventional determinants of growth and growth 
accelerations. Investment, trade and real exchange rate depreciation are the strongest links, 
but there seems to be very little association between standard economic reform packages 
and growth accelerations. Only 14% of accelerations were associated with economic liber-
alization. Only 18% of reform episodes and 14% of political regime change were followed by 
growth accelerations. Hausmann et al. (2005) conclude that ‘growth accelerations seem to be 
133
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
driven largely by idiosyncratic causes’. This may be because the ‘binding constraints’ on growth 
are ‘idiosyncratic’ and for certain time periods get relieved. This leads us to a brief discussion 
of the topic of growth diagnostics and binding constraints on growth pioneered by Hausmann 
et al. (2008).
‘Growth diagnostics’ and binding constraints on growth
A poor growth and development performance may be caused by a multitude of factors, but a 
sweeping programme of reforms (à la Washington Consensus), including financial and trade lib-
eralization, the privatization of enterprises and reductions in public expenditure, may not be the 
solution. This is what Hausmann et al. (2008) call the ‘spray gun’ approach to economic policy-
making, which may not hit hard enough the binding constraints on growth and development that 
really matter, and which are likely to vary from one country to another. Much better, they argue, 
is to undertake ‘growth diagnostics’, which locates the binding constraints on economic perform­
ance, and to target them directly, giving the most favourable outcomes from the resources 
expended. For an overview of the approach, see Rodrik (2010).
The framework of ‘growth diagnostics’ encompasses all major strategies of development. Its 
importance is that it clarifies which strategies are most likely to be effective. Since investment is 
the key to long-run growth, the obvious starting point for growth diagnostics is to answer the 
question: Why is investment low? Is it the high cost or lack of access to finance? Is it an intrinsic­
ally low social rate of return to investment, or is it that returns cannot easily be appropriated by 
private agents? If the problem is the cost and availability of financial resources, this is likely to be 
associated with low savings rates, high interest rates, and large balance of payments deficits. If 
the social return is low, this could be due to unfavourable geography, lack of infrastructure, poor 
education and health, and a lack of technological dynamism. If the ability to appropriate returns is 
difficult, this could be due to an uncertain economic and political climate, high taxes, absence of 
the rule of law, and weak property rights. Once the diagnosis is done, certain policy reforms follow 
and others can be ruled out, saving time and effort. Policy must then be targeted as close to the 
distortion and binding constraint as possible.
Hausmann et al. (2008) illustrate their methodology by comparing and contrasting three 
developing economies: Brazil, El Salvador and the Dominican Republic. According to the iden-
tification of binding constraints, policy recommendations differ. Brazil, for example, seems to be 
constrained by a shortage of finance, not by low returns on investment, so the policy message 
is to raise domestic saving and to attract foreign funds. By contrast, the binding constraint in El 
Salvador is not a shortage of investment funds, but a low social return associated with a lack of 
technological dynamism. It needs new (industrial) activities to invest in. The Dominican Republic 
tells a story of inability to cope with shocks. Here, institutional and political reforms are likely to 
yield the highest return. Institutions to deal with conflict management are very important to cope 
with the consequences of shocks and change (see Chapter 8).
The World Bank’s Commission on Growth and Development, chaired by the Nobel laureate 
Michael Spence, and including Robert Solow, identified 13 countries that have grown at more 
than 7% per annum for at least 25 years since 1950. They are listed in Case example 4.1. The 
ingredients of their success are also highlighted: commitment to growth, combined with effective 
governance; high savings and investment rates; rapid export growth; macroeconomic stability; 
the import of knowledge and technology, and market-friendly policies.
134
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
The World Bank’s Commission on Growth and Development 2008, headed by Nobel 
laureate Professor Michael Spence, identified 13 countries that have grown at more 
than 7% per annum for at least 25 years since 1950. They are listed below.
Per capita income
Economy
Period of high 
growth
At start of growth 
period
2005
Botswana
1960–2005
210
3,800
Brazil
1950–1980
960
4,000
China
1961–2005
105
1,400
Hong Kong SAR
1960–1997
3,100
29,900
Indonesia
1966–1997
200
900
Japan
1950–1983
3,500
39,600
Korea
1960–2001
1,100
13,200
Malaysia
1967–1997
790
4,400
Malta
1963–1994
1,100
9,600
Oman
1960–1999
950
9,000
Singapore
1967–2002
2,200
25,400
Taiwan (Province of 
China)
1965–2002
1,500
16,400
Thailand
1960–1997
330
2,400
The commission identified six major ingredients of success:
1.	 Commitment to growth, combined with effective governance
2.	 High savings and investment rates
3.	 Fast export growth
4.	 Macroeconomic stability
5.	 Import of knowledge and technology
6.	 Market-friendly policies.
Source: World Bank, 2008.
Case example 4.1
Findings of the Commission on Growth and Development
Summary
•
• All the great classical economists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were develop-
ment economists, in the sense that they were all concerned with the causes and consequences 
of economic growth during the Industrial Revolution in Europe at this time.
•
• Adam Smith was optimistic about the growth and development process based on increasing 
returns in industry.
•
• Malthus, Ricardo, Mill and Marx were all pessimistic about the development process because of 
diminishing returns in agriculture and a declining rate of profit in industry. Classical pessimism 
has been confounded by rapid technical progress in both agriculture (offsetting diminishing 
returns) and industry (allowing real wages to rise without the rate of profit falling).
135
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
•
• Modern growth theory originated with Harrod’s 1939 paper ‘An Essay in Dynamic Theory’, in 
which he distinguishes three growth rates: the actual growth rate (g), the warranted growth 
rate (gw) and the natural growth rate (gn). Divergences between g and gw cause short-run in­
stability. Divergences between gw and gn cause secular stagnation if gw . gn, or growing structural 
 
unemployment with inflation if gn . gw (which is the case for most developing economies). 
There were no mechanisms in the Harrod model for equalizing g, gw and gn.
•
• Solow’s 1956 neoclassical growth model provided an equilibrating mechanism to bring gw and 
gn together so that all economies in the long run would grow at their natural rate of growth 
determined by the growth of the labour force and the growth of labour productivity. In Solow’s 
original model, investment did not matter for long-run growth because of the assumption of 
diminishing returns to capital.
•
• Solow’s model also predicted that poor countries should grow faster than rich countries, lead-
ing to a convergence of per capita incomes across the world, but we do not observe a con-
vergence of living standards. ‘New’ growth theory, or endogenous growth theory, attempts to 
provide an answer. There are lots of factors that prevent the marginal product of capital from 
falling as countries get richer and invest more, such as education, R&D expenditure, learning 
by doing, trade and so on, so that investment does matter for long-run growth and is not sim-
ply exogenously determined by the natural rate of growth. The AK model is the simplest new 
growth theory model, which assumes constant returns to capital.
•
• The neoclassical Cobb–Douglas production function can be used to decompose the sources 
of growth into the contribution of labour input, capital input and total factor productivity 
growth. In fact, any variable can be included in a production function and its contribution to 
output measured.
•
• New growth theory uses many of the same variables as the production function approach in 
analysing the sources of growth, but with particular focus on education, R&D effort and insti-
tutional variables, and testing for conditional convergence by including in the estimating equa-
tion the initial level of per capita income.
•
• Cross-country analysis, however, is unable to explain the growth and development experience 
of individual countries, so growth diagnostics become important in identifying the binding 
constraints on growth in particular economies, and the factors that are associated with growth 
accelerations within countries.
•
• The major determinants of rapid growth and development are: high investment, fast export 
growth (to pay for imports), macroeconomic stability, high levels of human capital formation, 
and an institutional framework conducive to growth (e.g. secure property rights, the rule of law 
and political stability).
1.	 What did Adam Smith mean when he said that the ‘division of labour is limited by 
the extent of the market’ and ‘the extent of the market is limited by the division of 
labour’? What is the economic significance of these propositions?
2.	 Why were the classical economists after Adam Smith pessimistic about the 
growth and development process?
Discussion questions
Chapter 4
136
D E V E L O P M E N T  A N D  U N D E R D E V E L O P M E N T
Notes
  1.	 In practice, gn may respond to g. This is the idea of the endogeneity of the natural rate of growth. See 
Leon-Ledesma and Thirlwall (2002) for a study of developed countries; studies by Vogel (2009) and 
Libanio (2009) for Latin American countries, and Dray and Thirlwall (2011) for a study of a selec-
tion of Southeast Asian countries. Typically, an increase in the actual growth rate of 1 percentage 
point above the estimated natural rate increases the natural rate by between 0.5 and 0.8 percentage 
points through increasing the rate of growth of the labour force and labour productivity growth.
  2.	 This can be seen by rearranging the equation to qs/k 5 l, where q 5 Y/L; s 5 S/Y 5 DK/Y (since all 
 
saving leads to capital accumulation); k 5 K/L, and l 5 DL/L. Therefore (Y/L)(DK/Y)(L/K) 5 DL/L, 
or DK/K 5 DL/L.
  3.	 To illustrate the effect of a change in technical progress on the steady state, the axes in Figure 4.4 
must be changed to ‘output per effective worker’ on the vertical axis and ‘capital per effective 
worker’ on the horizontal axis.
  4.	 For the time being, the formidable problems associated with an aggregate measure of capital are 
ignored.
  5.	 The proof is as follows. The elasticity of output with respect to capital, a, is (dY/Y)/(dK/K) 5 
(dYK)/(dKY). Now, if capital is paid its marginal product, then dY/dK 5 r, where r is the rental 
on capital. Hence, a 5 rK/Y, where rK/Y is capital’s share of total output. Thus, under perfectly 
3.	 How does Harrod define the warranted growth rate and the natural growth rate? 
What are the implications for a country if the natural growth rate exceeds the 
warranted rate?
4.	 What is the mechanism in neoclassical growth theory by which the ­
warranted 
rate of growth adjusts to the natural rate? Do you think it is a realistic 
­
mechanism?
5.	 What are the essential assumptions and predictions of neoclassical growth theory, 
and how is the conclusion reached that investment does not matter for long-run 
growth?
6.	 What are the special properties of the Cobb–Douglas production function, and 
how might the function be used to calculate the sources of growth?
7.	 What is the difference between exogenous and endogenous technical progress?
8.	 What factors does the growth of ‘total factor productivity’ depend on?
9.	 What have been the major findings of production function studies of the sources 
of growth in developing countries?
10.	 Outline the essential propositions of new (endogenous) growth theory.
11.	 What have we learnt from the major studies of the macrodeterminants of growth 
in developing countries?
12.	 How useful is the exercise of growth diagnostics?
Discussion questions – continued
Chapter 4
137
4  •  T H E O R I E S  O F  E C O N O M I C  G R O W T H :  O L D  A N D  N E W
competitive assumptions, the elasticity of output with respect to any factor is equal to that fac-
tor’s share of total output.
  6.	 Alternatively, the total differential of equation (4.20) can be taken and the result divided by out-
put, which will also convert the equation into rate of growth form.
  7.	 The elasticity of substitution (s) relates the proportional change in relative factor inputs to a 
proportional change in the marginal rate of substitution between labour and capital (MRS) (or 
the proportional change in the relative factor–price ratio on the basis of marginal productivity 
theory). The elasticity of substitution may therefore be written as
s 5  ' log (L/K)
' log MRS
The proof that s 5 1 is very simple:
MRS 5  'Y
'K ` 'Y
'L `  5   aL
bK
log MRS 5 log a
b 1 log  L
K
Differentiating with respect to log MRS gives
1 5   ' log (L/K)
' log MRS  5 s 
  8.	 To overcome the restrictive property of the Cobb–Douglas function when the growth rates of 
factors differ, it is possible to use the more general constant elasticity of substitution produc-
tion function, of which the Cobb–Douglas is a special case. We cannot discuss the function here 
except to say that it, too, is not without its specification errors. There is still the assumption of 
constancy, which has the drawback that one may be ascribing changes in elasticity to changes in 
technology that are really due to changes in factor proportions. This limitation can be overcome 
only with a function possessing the property of variable elasticity of substitution.
  9.	 The production function used here is the translog production function, which allows for the elas-
ticity of substitution between inputs to vary.
10.	 For a discussion of the origins of endogenous growth theory, and its relevance to developing coun-
tries, see Romer (1994), Pack (1994), Ruttan (1998) and Temple (1999). For an advanced textbook 
treatment of the topic, see Barro and Sala-í-Martin (2003).
11. For an advanced theoretical discussion of convergence issues, see Durlauf (1996); see also Islam 
(2003).
Websites on growth theory
New School for Social Research (New York) www.newschool.edu/nssr/
Economic Growth Resources run by Jon Temple, Bristol University, UK www.bristol.ac.uk/efm/people/
jon-r-temple/overview.html
Overseas Development Institute www.odi.org
Foundation for Advanced Studies on International Development www.fasid.or.jp/english
Institute of Developing Economies: Japan External Trade Organization www.ide.go.jp/English/
Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies www.wiiw.ac.at
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace http://carnegieendowment.org/
This is a Blank 
Page
FACTORS IN THE 
­
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
II
This is a Blank 
Page
